part0000 

 Two Roman Girls

 Ecce! In pictura est puella, nomine Cornelia. Cornelia est puella Romana quae in Italia habitat. Etiam in pictura est villa rustica ubi Cornelia aestate habitat. Cornelia est laeta quod iam in villa habitat. Cornelia iam sub arbore sedet. Etiam in pictura est altera puella, nomine Flavia. Flavia est puella Romana quae in villa vicina habitat. Dum Cornelia sedet, Flavia cantat. 5 Laeta est Flavia quod Cornelia iam in villa habitat.

 Ecce! Look! puella, (a, the) girl nomine, by name, called quae, who

 habitat, (he, she) is living, lives

 etiam, also

 ubi, where

 aestate, in summer

 laeta, happy

 Exercise la

 Responde Latine :

 1. Quis est Cornelia?

 2. Ubi habitat Cornelia?

 3. Cur est Cornelia laeta?

 4. Quid facit Cornelia?

 5. Ubi habitat Flavia?

 6. Quid facit Flavia?

 7. Cur est Flavia laeta?

 4

 quod, because iam, now

 sub arbore, under the tree sedet, (he, she) is sitting, sits altera, a second vicina, neighboring dum, while

 cantat, (he, she) is singing, sings

 Quis . . . ? Who . . . ?

 Cur . . . ? Why . . . ?

 Quid facit . . . ? What does . . . do? What is . . . doing?

 Exercise lb

 From the passage give the Latin for:

 1. Cornelia is happy.

 2. Cornelia is sitting under the tree.

 3. Flavia is a Roman girl.

 4. Cornelia now lives in the farmhouse

 5

 A Happy Outing

 Cornelia est puella Romana. Flavia quoque est puella Romana. Cornelia et Flavia sunt puellae Romanae quae in Italia habitant. Cornelia et Flavia sunt amicae. Hodie puellae non sedent sed in agris ambulant. Puellae cantant quod laetae sunt. Brevi tempore Cornelia defessa est. Non iam ambulat sed sub arbore sedet. Flavia, quae est puella strenua, in agris currit. Brevi tempore 5 Flavia quoque est defessa. Iam Flavia et Cornelia sub arbore sedent quod defessae sunt. Tandem puellae defessae ex agris ad villam rusticam lente ambulant.

 quoque, also et, and

 sunt, (they) are amicae, friends hodie, today sed, but

 in agris, in the fields ambulant, (they) are walking, walk brevi tempore, in a short time, soon

 defessa, tired strenua, active, energetic currit, (he, she) is running, runs tandem, at last ex agrls, from the fields ad villam rusticam, to or towards the farmhouse lente, slowly

 VERBS: The Endings -t and -nt

 Look at these sentences:

 Flavia in Italia habitat. Flavia lives in Italy.

 Puella in agris currit. The girl is running in the fields.

 Flavia et Cornelia in Italia habitant. Flavia and Cornelia live in Italy. Puellae sub arbore sedent. The girls are sitting under the tree.

 When the verb ends in -1, the subject of the sentence is singular, e.g., Flavia, puella.

 When the verb ends in -nt, the subject of the sentence is plural, e.g., Flavia et Cornelia, puellae.

 6

 Exercise 2a

 Responde Latine:

 1. Ubi habitant Cornelia et Flavia?

 2. Quid faciunt puellae hodie? Quid faciunt . . . ?

 What are . . . doing?

 3. Cur puellae cantant?

 4. Quid facit Cornelia quod defessa est?

 5. Quid faciunt puellae quod defessae sunt?

 Exercise 2b

 From the passage give the Latin for:

 1. Cornelia and Flavia are Roman girls.

 2. In a short time Cornelia is tired.

 3. Flavia is running in the fields.

 4. At last the girls walk slowly to the farmhouse.

 Exercise 2c

 Select the correct word, read the sentence aloud, and translate it into English:

 1. Flavia in villa vicina habitat / habitant

 2. Cornelia et Flavia sub arbore sedet / sedent

 3. Cornelia et Flavia defessae est/sunt

 4. Flavia strenua est / sunt

 5. Cornelia et Flavia sunt puella Romana / puellae

 Romanae

 Exercise 2d

 Read aloud and translate:

 Cornelia est puella Romana quae in villa rustica aestate habitat.

 In villa vicina habitat altera puella, nomine Flavia, quae est arnica eius. Dum puellae in villa habitant, in agris saepe ambulant. Hodie Cornelia ad villam Flavianam ambulat ubi in agris sub arbore sedet Flavia. Iam puellae laetae currunt. Brevi tempore, quod defessae sunt, 5 non iam currunt sed sub arbore sedent.

 saepe, often

 eius, her

 A Roman Family

 The stories and pictures in this book are about a Roman family. When we first meet them, they are living not in Rome but on a farm (fundus) in the country near Baiae in Campania.

 While spending their summers on the farm, the family occupies part of a large farmhouse called a villa or villa rustica which has a central farmyard, court, or garden (hortus) surrounded by living quarters for the owner's family in one corner, a second farmyard with wine vats sunk in the ground, and various farm buildings including rooms for the slave laborers.

 The date is a.d. 80.

 In our family, there is a daughter, Cornelia, who is thirteen, and a son, Marcus, fifteen. Both wear the same dress as their respective parents, Cornelius and Aurelia, because the Romans did not have special clothes for children. Neither goes to school when at the villa, their education being in the hands of a Greek tutor, Eucleides. Although the father is called Gaius Cornelius Calvus and the son Marcus Cornelius Calvus, the daughter has to be content with the feminine form of her father’s name, Cornelia. (What must Aurelia’s father have been called?) Although Marcus has lessons from Eucleides, he gets a good deal of his education directly from his father, for Gaius is an old-fashioned Roman who thinks a father should superintend his son’s education personally.

 Gaius is responsible for the estate. As father, he is not only master of his own house, but legally has the power of life and death over his entire household, though he never exercises this power. Aurelia runs the household. She does some wool-spinning—a traditional practice which recalls the old Roman ideal of self-sufficiency—but, unlike the modern housewife, she has a miniature army of slaves to help with the chores.

 They have living with them a younger boy, Sextus. He is not related to the family, but Cornelius is acting as his guardian while his father is on service overseas. Also with the family, from time to time, is Cornelia’s friend, Flavia, who lives in a neighboring farmhouse referred to as the villa Flaviana because it is owned by her father, Flavius.

 Most Roman families had slaves who did the everyday work of the household and the farms. The tutor, Eucleides, is a slave, as is Davus, the overseer of the slaves and the farm.

 Baiae, on the Bay of Naples, was a fashionable resort for wealthy Romans, many of whom built splendid villas there. Puteoli, further around the Bay, was a thriving seaport where corn-ships from Egypt and Sicily would unload their cargo, to be taken to Rome by road. Nearby Naples (Neapolis), a center of culture and learning for the Romans, was far enough from Vesuvius to survive when the eruption of A.D. 79 overwhelmed the prosperous town of Pompeii.

 This whole area, part of the fertile province of Campania, in summer attracted Romans who were seeking relief from the heat and noise of Rome in this “Garden of Italy."

 In the Garden

 In pictura est puer Romanus, nomine Marcus, qui in Italia habitat. Etiam in pictura est alter puer, nomine Sextus, qui in eadem villa rustica habitat. Marcus et Sextus sunt amici. Hodie pueri in horto clamant et rident quod laeti sunt.

 Vir quoque est in pictura, nomine Davus; qui est servus. In Italia sunt 5 multi servi qui in agris et in villis rusticis laborant. Pueri sunt Romani, sed Davus non est Romanus. Est vir Britannicus qui iam in Italia laborat. Sextus et Marcus, quod sunt pueri Romani, non laborant. Davus solus laborat, Iratus quod pueri clamant.

 Subito Sextus in piscinam cadit. Marcus ridet, sed Davus, “Abite, 10 molesti!” clamat et ad piscinam Iratus currit. Sextus madidus ex piscina exit, et pueri ex horto currunt. Davus gemit.

 puer, (a, the) boy qui, who eadem, the same in horto, in the garden clamant, (they) are shouting, shout rident, (they) are laughing, laugh, smile

 vir, (a, the) man servus, (a, the) slave multi, many

 in villis rusticis, in farmhouses

 laborant, (they) are working, work

 solus, alone

 Iratus, angry

 subito, suddenly

 in piscinam, into the fishpond

 cadit, (he, she) falls

 Abite, molesti! Go away, you pests!

 madidus, dripping, soaked

 gemit, (he, she) groans

 10

 « -

 11

 Exercise 3a

 Exercise 3b

 From the passage give the Latin for.:

 1. Today the boys laugh because they are happy.

 2. In Italy there are many slaves who work in farmhouses.

 3. Davus now works in Italy.

 4. Davus runs to the fishpond, and the boys run out of the garden.

 NOUNS: Singular and Plural

 Note how these words change in the plural:

 Singular Plural

 puella puellae

 servus servi

 puer pueri

 Compare also: puella Romana puellae Romanae puer Romanus pueri Romani

 Exercise 3c

 Select, read aloud, and translate:

 1. Marcus et Sextus in eadem villa _

 2. Davus vir Britannicus 

 3. In agris laborant 

 4. Pueri et puellae saepe 

 5. In agris sunt multi 

 6. In Italia habitat 

 7. Marcus et Sextus sunt pueri 

 8. Cornelia et Flavia sunt puellae _

 habitat / habitant est / sunt servus / servi gemit / currit / currunt puella / servus / servi Marcus et Sextus/ Marcus / puellae Romanus / Romani / Romanae

 Romanus / Romani / Romanae

 Exercise 3d

 Read aloud and translate:

 Hodie Sextus in horto ambulat solus quod Marcus in villa sedet. Sextus est puer strenuus qui saepe in agris et in horto currit. Brevi tempore Davus in hortum ambulat, sollicitus quod Sextus in horto est. Dum Davus laborat, Sextus eum spectat. Sextus Davum saepe vexat, sed hodie nihil facit. 5

 In hortum ad piscinam currunt Flavia et Cornelia. Laetae rident et clamant. Sextus furtim ad piscinam ambulat. Subito in piscinam cadit statua rustica. Madidae iam sunt puellae et Iratae. Davus est sollicitus quod statua est in piscina, sed Sextus, “Statua est salva," clamat et ex horto currit. 10

 in hortum, into the garden sollicitus, anxious, worried eum, him

 spectat, (he, she) watches

 vexat, (he, she) annoys nihil, nothing furtim, stealthily salva, undamaged, all right

 Dress

 Gaius’ tunic is knee-length and, to show that he is a senator, it has a broad purple stripe running from the neck right down the front. On official occasions he wears over the tunic the toga, a very full garment requiring the services of two or three slaves before its folds can be successfully draped. Most Romans would wear the toga virilis, a plain white toga, but Gaius has the privilege of wearing the toga praetexta, white with a purple edging, the distinctive dress of a senator who has held high office.

 Aurelia wears a simple sleeveless white tunic and, over the tunic, a stola — a long, flounced dress, girdled at the waist and reaching to her ankles. For outdoor wear she adds the palla, a single piece of material draped around the body.

 Cornelia, like her mother, is clad in the stola. Marcus, like his father, wears the tunic and, in public, a toga over it. A boy’s toga was the same as a senior senator’s—the toga praetexta. Both boys and girls wore around their necks a bulla or luck-charm which was given to them at their naming ceremony. Girls continued to wear the bulla until they were married. When boys came of age, at sixteen, they dedicated the bulla and the first scrapings of their beard to the household gods and thereafter wore the toga virilis.

 Romans generally went bare-headed. If protection from the wind or weather was needed, the toga or palla could be drawn over the head. Women used parasols to shield them from the sun, and men used the broad-brimmed hat (petasus) for this purpose.

 14

 Show-off!

 Sextus est puer molestus qui semper Corneliam vexat. Cornelia igitur Sextum non amat. Hodie sub arbore dormit Cornelia. Sextus puellam conspicit et furtim appropinquat. Arborem ascendit et subito magna voce clamat. Vocem Cornelia audit sed Sextum non videt. Magna vox Corneliam terret. Sollicita est. 5

 Tum Marcus ad arborem currit. Marcus puerum molestum conspicit et clamat, “Descende, Sexte!”

 Sextus clamat, “Marce, cur tu non arborem ascendis? Nihil me terret. Quid te terret?”

 “Cave, Sexte!” clamat Marcus. “Rami sunt Infirmi.” 10

 Subito Marcus et Cornelia magnum fragorem audiunt; Sextus ex arbore cadit. Rident Marcus et Cornelia, sed non ridet Sextus.

 semper, always

 igitur, therefore

 amat, (he. she) likes, loves

 dormit, (he, she) sleeps

 conspicit, (he, she) catches sight of

 appropinquat, (he, she) approaches

 ascendit, (he, she) climbs

 magna voce, in a loud voice

 vox, (a, the) voice

 audit, (he, she) hears, listens to

 videt, (he, she) sees terret, (he, she, it) frightens turn, at that moment, then Descende! Come down! tu, you (subject) te, you (direct object)

 Cave, Sexte! Be careful, Sextus! ramus, (a, the) branch Infirmus, weak, shaky ffagor, (a, the) crash, noise

 In Latin, the form Sexte is used when Sextus is addressed by name. (Compare Marce.) No such change is made in English.

 16

 Exercise 4a

 Responde Latine:

 1. Qualis puer est Sextus? Qualis . . . ? What sort of ... ?

 2. Quid facit Cornelia hodie?

 3. Quid facit Sextus?

 4. Quid audit Cornelia?

 5. Quo Marcus currit? Quo . . . ? Where ... to?

 6. Quid clamat Sextus?

 7. Quid audiunt Marcus et Cornelia?

 Exercise 4b

 NOUNS: The Ending -m

 Look at these sentences taken from story 4:

 Cornelia Sextum non amat.

 Sextus puellam conspicit.

 Vocem Cornelia audit.

 Marcus puerum molestum conspicit.

 Magnum fragorem audiunt.

 In these sentences Sextum, puellam, the direct objects of the verbs.

 Cornelia does not like Sextus.

 Sextus catches sight of the girl.

 Cornelia hears the voice.

 Marcus catches sight of the annoying boy.

 They hear a great crash.

 vocem, puerum, and fragorem are

 The Latin nouns you have met so far end in -m when they are direct objects and are singular.

 Versiculi: "Serves Him Right," page 89.

 Word Study I

 Latin and English

 Over 60% of the words in the English language come from Latin. Look again at these words from Chapter 1:

 pictura habitat

 It is not difficult to think of English words which come from them:

 picture inhabit

 The meanings and spellings of these English words show their relationship with Latin. Such words are called derivatives, since they are derived from (or come from) another language, in this case, Latin.

 Of course, not all of English is derived from Latin. Most of the simple words of everyday English come from Anglo-Saxon, the Germanic ancestor of English. For this reason, many modern German words sound similar to English, such as “Buch” (book) and “Nacht” (night).

 English words derived from Latin are usually the longer or more difficult words. For example, consider the two English words water and aquatic. The simpler word water is derived from the Anglo-Saxon “waeter” and is related to the German “Wasser.” The more difficult word aquatic comes from the Latin word for water, aqua. Even if one did not know the meaning of aquatic, Latin would help to answer the following question:

 Which of these is an aquatic sport?

 (a) horseback riding (b) tennis (c) swimming (d) soccer

 Since aquatic means “related to water,” the correct answer is “swimming.” Knowledge of Latin will help with the meanings of over 60% of the words in the English language.

 Exercise 1

 Below are some Latin words from Chapters 1-4. Give the meaning of each word. Then, with the meaning in mind, think of at least one English word derived from each Latin word. Use each English word correctly in a sentence.

 strenua solus servus agris descende

 multi nomine spectat terret vox (voce)

 Exercise 2

 Match each English word in the column at the left with its meaning in the column at the right. Use the meaning of the Latin word in parentheses as a guide.

 1 . chant (cantat)

 2. sedentary (sedet)

 3. ridicule (rldet)

 4. virile (vir)

 5. elaborate (laborat)

 6. audible (audit)

 7. conspicuous (conspicit)

 8. dormant (dormit)

 The Dictionary

 An English dictionary is a useful source not only for finding the meanings of words but also for discovering the languages from which they are derived. Not all dictionaries provide information on derivation, but most larger ones do. In these more complete dictionaries, entries may include:

 a. the word

 b. a pronunciation guide

 c. an abbreviation indicating the part of speech

 d. derivation information

 e. definition(s)

 Locate these items of information in the following dictionary entry:

 villain (viL an), n. [O.Fr. vilain <L.L. villanus <L. villa, a farm, country house.] 1. a baseborn or clownish person. 2. a scoundrel.

 This entry shows that the English word villain is a noun which comes from Old French “vilain,” which is from the Late Latin villanus, which derives from Latin villa, meaning a farm or country house. This derivation is especially interesting since it reveals the negative feelings toward country people that must have been prevalent at the time when the word villain came into use in English.

 The abbreviations used in notes on derivation will be different from dictionary to dictionary. All abbreviations are explained at the beginning of each dictionary.

 Exercise 3

 Using a dictionary large enough to contain information on derivation, look up the following English words and copy down the complete derivation for each. Be prepared to interpret these derivations as in the example above. All of these English words are derived from Latin words you have met.

 nominal cadence virtue alter ramify infirm

 20

 a. manly

 b. easy to catch sight of

 c. to work out carefully

 d. a type of singing

 e. able to be heard

 f. asleep, inactive

 g. to make fun of, mock

 h. seated, stationary

 At a Loose End

 Sextus, ubi in hortum mane exit, Davum conspicit et furtim appropinquat. Subito, dum Davus est occupatus, clamat, “Quid tu facis, Dave?” Davus, qui Sextum non amat, Iratus respondet, “Cur tu me vexas? Ego clamorem tuum semper audio. Tu semper clamas, semper rides, semper curris. Ego semper sum occupatus. Ego in horto laboro. Ecce! Sunt multae 5 arbores in agris. Si tu puer strenuus es, ascende arborem! Abi, moleste!” Sextus, laetus quod Davus est Iratus, iam in agros abit. Arborem magnam petit et statim ascendit. Ibi in ramis sedet et, “Ubi es, Marce?” clamat. “Ecce! Ego in arbore sedeo. Ego non sum timidus. Nihil me terret. Cur tu quoque in agros non venis? Arbores non sunt magnae. Rami non sunt 10 Infirmi.”

 Sed Marcus, qui adhuc dormit, Sextum non audit. Sextus igitur descendit et lente ad villam redit.

 ubi, when

 mane, early in the day ego, I

 clamor, shout, shouting tuus, your sum, I am si, if

 magnus, big, great

 petit, (he, she) looks for, seeks

 statim, immediately

 ibi, there

 venis, you come

 adhuc, still

 redit, (he, she) returns

 OCCVp&bdS, b^y, ocois^ed respcndef respond Obi+, (be/she) goes ouoaa

 nmiduc,,

 Exercise 5a

 Using story S as a guide, give the Latin for:

 1. Sextus catches sight of Davus.

 2. What are you doing, Davus?

 3. Why do you annoy me?

 4. I am working in the garden.

 5. Sextus immediately climbs a big tree.

 6. Marcus does not hear Sextus.

 21

 Exercise 5b

 Read aloud and translate:

 1. Sextus Davum saepe vexat; Davus Sextum non amat.

 2. Puellae Marcum et servum conspiciunt.

 3. Magnam vocem Cornelia audit.

 4. Magna vox puellam terret.

 5. Sextus arborem magnam ascendit.

 6. Pueri clamorem audiunt et statim in hortum currunt.

 7. Cur non sollicita es, Cornelia? Cornelius, pater tuus, Iratus statuam petit.

 8. Davus, ubi clamorem audit, est Iratus.

 9. Aestate dum Marcus in villa rustica habitat, amici eius saepe ad villam veniunt.

 eius, his

 ’ !S

 Marcus to the Rescue

 Cornelia et Flavia in horto saepe ambulant. Si dies est calidus, ex horto in silvam ambulant quod ibi est rivus frigidus. In eadem silva pueri quoque saepe errant.

 Hodie, quod dies est calidus, puellae sub arbore prope rivum sedent. Dum ibi sedent, Flavia, “Cur Marcus arbores ascendere non vult? Estne puer 5 ignavus?”

 “Minime!” respondet Cornelia. “Cur tu Marcum non amas? Marcus neque ignavus neque temerarius est.”

 Tum Flavia, “Sed Marcus est semper sollicitus. Sextum nihil terret.” Subito lupum conspiciunt qui ad rivum furtim descendit. Perterritae sunt 10 puellae. Statim clamant, “Marce! Sexte! Ferte auxilium! Ferte auxilium!” Pueri, ubi clamorem audiunt, statim ad puellas currunt. Lupus eos iam conspicit et statim petit. Tum Sextus, quod lupus eum terret, arborem petit et statim ascendit. Sed Marcus ramum arripit et lupum repellit. Puellae e silva currunt et ad villam salvae adveniunt. IbevI tempore, ubi Marcus 15 advenit, eum laetae excipiunt. Sextus, puer ignavus, adhuc sedet in arbore perterritus. Descendere timet.

 dies, (a, the) day calidus, warm in silvam, into the woods rivus, (a, the) stream fflgidus, cool errant, (they) wander prope, near

 vult, (he, she) wishes, wants ignavus, cowardly, lazy neque . . . neque . . . , neither . . . nor . . . temerarius, rash

 lupus, (a, the) wolf perterritus, frightened Ferte auxilium! Bring help! Help! ad puellas, towards the girls eos, them

 arripit, (he, she) grabs hold of, snatches

 repellit, (he, she) drives off e silva, out of the woods adveniunt, (they) reach, arrive at excipiunt, (they) welcome timet, (he, she) fears, is afraid

 23

 Exercise 6a

 Responde Latine:

 1. Ubi hodie puellae sedent?

 2. Estne Marcus ignavus?

 3. Estne Marcus sollicitus?

 4. COr puellae perterritae sunt?

 5. Quid puellae clamant?

 6. Ubi clamorem audiunt, quid faciunt pueri?

 7. Cur Sextus arborem ascendit?

 8. Quem lupus terret? Quem . .

 9. Quid facit Marcus?

 10. Quid faciunt puellae?

 11. Quid facit Sextus?

 12. Qualis puer est Sextus?

 Exercise 6b

 Select , read aloud , and translate:

 1. Hodie Sextus ascendit.

 arbor / arborem

 2. Sextus conspicit.

 Marcus / Marcum

 3. Nihil terret.

 Sextum / Sextus

 4. puellae conspiciunt.

 Lupus / Lupum

 5. Pueri audiunt.

 clamorem / clamor

 6. lupus terret.

 Sextus / Sextum

 7. Sextus arborem ascendit.

 magnus / magnam

 8. Puellae laetae excipiunt.

 Marcus / Marcum

 . ? Whom . . . ?

 1

 VERBS: The Infinitive

 Look at these sentences:

 Arbores ascendere non vult. He does not wish to climb trees.

 Descendere timet. He is afraid to come down.

 The words ascendere and descendere are present infinitives. The present infinitive is a form of the verb that can be recognized by the ending -re and may be translated by “to . . . ,” e.g., errare, “to wander."

 Exercise 6c

 Read aloud and translate:

 1. Ego ad hortum curro quod Davum vexare volo.

 2. Puellae saepe cantant, sed Sextus cantare non potest.

 3. Ego arborem non ascendo quod in rivum cadere nolo.

 4. Quod dies est calidus, tu prope rivum errare paras.

 5. Lupus ad villam furtim appropinquat; servus eum repellere non potest.

 6. Sextus ex arbore descendere non vult quod lupus eum terret.

 7. Ego in silva solus ambulare timeo.

 8. Prope piscinam sedet puella. Advenit altera puella. Iam laetae cantant puellae.

 9. Subito statua rustica in piscinam cadit. Clamant puellae.

 10. Puer lupum conspicit, ramum arripit, lupum repellere parat.

 11. Si dies est calidus, Marcus vult ambulare in silvam ubi prope rivum frigidum sedere potest.

 12. In hortum exire nolo quod in villa laborare volo.

 volo, I wish, want potest, (he, she) is able, can

 nolo, I do not wish paras, you prepare, get ready

 The Slave Market

 Slaves, who were in the early days mainly prisoners of war, were plentiful, and even the poorest Roman household might own one or two. Davus had been captured in Britain and sent to Rome to be sold by auction in the Forum. When his feet were whitened with chalk by the slave-dealer, Davus was mystified, but he soon discovered that this had been done to all new arrivals from abroad. A placard was hung around his neck indicating that he was British and could read and write. He was then put on a revolving stand, and bidding for him began.

 He felt pretty uncomfortable standing there like an exhibit at the cattle-market, but he put the best face on it, looking around challengingly at the bidders. Titus Cornelius, father of Gaius Cornelius, was in the Forum that day to purchase some new slaves. He did not pay much attention to the placard— mangones, as slave-dealers were called, were notorious swindlers— but when he saw Davus’ fine physique, fair hair, and blue eyes he made a bid of 5,000 sesterces, and Davus soon found himself beside the overseer and his new master.

 By this time Titus was offering 10,000 sesterces for a Greek from Rhodes. This puzzled Davus because the fellow was a pale, half-starved individual who looked as if a hard day’s work would kill him. The overseer, too, looked annoyed at this extravagant bid but said nothing. But when he heard Titus being forced up to 20,000, then 30,000, he could contain himself no longer and muttered angrily, “He’s not worth half that, master!” But Titus ignored him and finally paid 35,000 for the Greek Eucleides. The odd qualifications on the placard, “skilled in geometry and rhetoric,” must, Davus thought, have had something to do with the record price!

 As Davus, along with the strange Greek, was packed on a cart with some tough-looking Thracians also bought that day, he was filled with fear and doubt as to what might happen to him. But he needn’t have worried. Old Titus proved to be the kindest of masters, and now, thirty years later, Davus, himself a grizzled fifty-five, was overseer to Gaius. On some of the neighboring farms, he knew, things were not so good.

 26

 Bad News

 In villa sedet vir Romanus, nomine Gaius Cornelius, qul est pater Marc! et Corneliae. Cornelius est senator Romanus. Solus sedet quod multas epistulas scribere vult. Dum pater occupatus est, Marcus et Sextus et Cornelia in agris vicinis errant. Ibi multos servos laborantes spectant.

 Subito nuntium conspiciunt qui ad eos venit. Nuntius, ubi advenit, 5 pueros salutat.

 “Salve!” respondet Marcus. “Quem tu petis?”

 Nuntius, “Gaium Cornelium peto,” inquit.

 Marcus, “Gaius Cornelius est pater meus,” inquit. “Est in villa.” Nuntium in villam ducit et patrem petit. 10

 “Pater,” inquit Marcus, “nuntius in villa est.”

 Cornelius statim venit et nuntium salutat. Epistulam nuntius tradit. Cornelius, ubi epistulam legit, “Eheu!” inquit. “Princeps senatores Romanos ad urbem revocat. Eos consulere vult. Necesse est ad urbem redire.”

 “Eugepae!” clamat Sextus, qui Romam redire vult. Gemit Cornelia quod 15 Flavia ad urbem venire non potest.

 scribere, to write laborantes, working nuntius, messenger salutat, (he, she) greets Salve! Greetings! Good morning! Hello!

 inquit, (he, she) says meus, my

 ducit, (he, she) leads, takes

 tradit, (he, she) hands over legit, (he, she) reads Eheu! Alas! princeps, the emperor ad urbem, to the city revocat, (he, she) recalls consulere, to consult necesse est, it is necessary Eugepae! Hurray!

 28

 Exercise 7a

 Responde Latine:

 1. Ubi sedet Cornelius?

 2. Cur Cornelius solus sedet?

 3. Ubi Marcus et Sextus et Cornelia errant?

 4. Quos spectant in agris? Quos . . . ? Whom . . . ? (plural)

 5. Quis advenit?

 6. Quem nuntius petit?

 7. Quo Marcus nuntium ducit?

 8. Cur princeps senatores Romanos ad urbem revocat?

 9. Quis clamat “eugepae”? Cur?

 10. Cur gemit Cornelia?

 NOUNS: The Endings -as, -os, -es

 Look at these three sentences:

 Multas epistulas scribit. He writes many letters.

 Multos servos spectant. They watch many slaves.

 Senatores Romanos revocat. He recalls the Roman senators.

 The words epistulas, servos, and senatores introduce you to new endings. You already know that most singular Latin nouns end in -m when they are used as direct objects. Plural nouns used as direct objects usually end in -s, e.g., epistulas, servos, and senatores.

 Exercise 7b

 Using story 7 as a guide , give the Latin for.

 1. Cornelius is the father of Marcus and Cornelia.

 2. Cornelius wants to write many letters.

 3. Marcus and Sextus watch many slaves working in the fields.

 4. The messenger greets the boys.

 5. The messenger is looking for Gaius Cornelius.

 6. Marcus looks for (his) father.

 7. The messenger hands over a letter.

 8. It is necessary to return to the city immediately.

 9. Sextus wishes to return to Rome, but Flavia cannot.

 NOUNS: Cases and Declensions

 Nominative and Accusative Cases

 The form of the Latin noun when used as the subject of a verb is known as the nominative case.

 The form of the Latin noun when used as the direct object of a verb is known as the accusative case.

 For example:

 Nominative

 Lupus eum terret.

 The wolf frightens him.

 Lupi pueros terrent.

 The wolves frighten the boys.

 Accusative

 Puellae lupum vident.

 The girls see the wolf.

 Servi lupos repellunt.

 The slaves drive back the wolves.

 The nouns you have met so far belong to three groups or declensions:

 Be sure to learn these forms thoroughly.

 Notes

 1 . In the 2nd declension, most nouns end in -us in the nominative singular (e.g., servus), but there are a few like puer, ager, and vir which end in -r. In both types, however, the accusative singular ends in -um and the accusative plural in -os.

 2. Although arbor, pater, and mater end in -r, their other endings put them in the 3rd declension.

 3. In the 3rd declension, you will note that the nouns you have met can end in different ways in the nominative singular (e.g., arbor, princeps, urbs, pater, vox). Nevertheless, their accusative singulars all end in -em, and both nominative and accusative plurals end in -es.

 Building Up the Meaning I

 When you are reading a Latin sentence, each word as you meet it gives you certain clues about its own meaning and about what is likely to come next. First you recognize the basic meaning of the word, and then you note the case of the word, since the case will help you decide what the function of the word is in the sentence.

 Consider the following sentences:

 1. Servus currit.

 The first word we meet is servus. We know that it is the subject of the verb because we recognize that it is in the nominative case. We can expect a verb which will tell us what the slave is “doing.”

 2. Servus Davum conspicit.

 We go from servus to Davum and recognize Davum as accusative case. It is likely that the slave is “doing” something to Davus and that a verb will follow to tell us what the slave is “doing” to Davus.

 3. Davum pueri vexant.

 The first word we meet is Davum. We know that it is the direct object of the verb because we recognize it as accusative case. It is likely that someone is doing something to Davus. The next word is puerl. We recognize that it is nominative, and therefore it is the boys who are doing something to Davus. The verb vexant tells us what they are doing.

 4. Ramum arripit.

 We know immediately that someone is doing something to a branch, but, since there is no noun in the nominative case, the ending of the verb indicates the subject and the meaning of the verb completes the sense.

 Exercise 7c

 Read aloud and translate:

 1. Lupus puellas terret.

 2. Puellae silvam saepe amant.

 3. Aestate arbores Sextus ascendere vult.

 4. Davum et servos pueri vexare timent.

 5. Lupi pueros et puellas semper terrent.

 6. Clamores pueri audiunt; puellas petunt.

 7. Servi lupos ex agris repellunt.

 8. Senatores Romani nuntios salutant.

 9. Senatores Romanos princeps consulere vult.

 10. Cornelius, ubi non est occupatus, per agros errare potest.

 Building Up the Meaning II

 In 3rd declension nouns the ending of both the nominative and accusative plural is -es. To decide which case is being used, you must look for further clues. Study these sentences, and, with the help of the clues, translate them:

 1. Pueri clamores audiunt.

 2. Pueros clamores terrent.

 3. Princeps senatores ad urbem revocat.

 4. Principem senatores excipiunt.

 5. Clamores matres audiunt.

 In sentence 1, since pueri is in the nominative case and is therefore the subject of the verb, clamores must be in the accusative case and is therefore the direct object.

 In sentence 2, since pueros is accusative, clamores must be nominative.

 In sentence 3, since princeps is nominative, senatores must be accusative. An additional clue is the fact that the verb revocat is singular.

 In sentence 4, since principem is accusative, senatores must be nominative. An additional clue is the fact that the verb excipiunt is plural.

 In sentence 5, where both nouns end in -es and the verb is plural, it is the sense which indicates that clamores is accusative and matres nominative.

 Exercise 7d

 Explain the clues in these sentences y read aloud , and translate:

 1. Servus senatores videt.

 2. Arbores pueri saepe ascendunt.

 3. Fragores puellas terrent.

 4. Patrem voces vexant.

 5. Voces in horto audit.

 6. Matres in via conspiciunt.

 Versiculi: "Show-Off!" page 89.

 Review I

 Exercise la

 Change nominatives to accusatives and accusatives to nominatives , keeping the same number (singular or plural):

 Exercise lb

 Change singular subjects to plural and plural subjects to singular, and make the necessary changes in the endings of the verbs:

 1. Servus clamat.

 2. Puellae cantant.

 3. Viri sedent.

 4. Puer ad villam advenit.

 5. Lupus rivum pet it.

 6. Nuntii in agris currunt.

 7. Vox puerum terret.

 8. Puella amica est.

 9. Servi fragorem audiunt.

 10. Nuntius puerum consp icit.

 Exercise Ic

 Select the appropriate adjective from the pool below to complete each of the following sentences. Be sure to use the right ending on the adjective. Translate each sentence.

 1. Davus est, quod pueri clamant.

 2. Sextus arborem ascendit, quod est.

 3. Flavia in villa habitat.

 4. Marcus ramum arripit et lupum repellit.

 5. Davus pueros in piscina conspicit.

 6. Davus est, quod Sextus in horto ambulat.

 7. Flavia et Cornelia puellae sunt et saepe in agris currunt.

 8. Sextus est puer et puellas terret.

 9. Ubi lupus venit, Sextus in arbore sedet, quod puer est.

 10. Cornelius sedet, quod epistulas scribere vult.

 Exercise Id

 Read the following passage and answer the questions below in Latin:

 Hodie quod pater Marcum ad vicinam urbem ducit, Sextus in agros solus errat. Ibi arbores ascendere potest. Ibi servos in agris laborantes spectare potest. Subito, dum per agros ambulat, clamores magnos audit qui eum terrent. Currit ad arborem quae prope rivum est. Celeriter ascendere parat sed, quod perterritus est et rami sunt Infirmi, 5 statim in rivum cadit.

 “Ferte auxilium!” clamat. “Celeriter venite! Ego natare non possum.”

 Servi, ubi clamores audiunt, statim ad rivum currunt, ramos arripiunt, ad Sextum extendunt. Sextus ramum arripit. Tum servus qui 10 ramum tenet ad ripam Sextum trahere potest. Sextus madidus ex rivo exit lacrimans. Servi miserum puerum spectant et rident.

 “Cur in rivo natas?” inquiunt.

 Sextus, qui servos saepe vexat, respondere non potest et miser ad villam abit. Dum per agros currit, servos ridentes audit. 15

 in agros, into the fields per agros, through the fields qul, which celeriter, quickly natare, to swim extendunt, (they) stretch out

 tenet, (he, she) holds ripa, river bank trahere, to drag, pull lacrimans, weeping miser, wretched ridentes, laughing

 1. Why is Sextus roaming in the fields by himself?

 2. What two things is he able to do in the fields ?

 3. What frightens him?

 4. What action does he take?

 5. Why doesn’t he succeed in climbing the tree?

 6. Why is he upset when he falls into the stream?

 7. How do the slaves help him?

 8. What is Sextus doing as he is pulled ashore?

 9. What do the slaves ask him?

 10. Why doesn’t Sextus reply?

 11. How do the slaves show their feelings about Sextus?

 Exercise Ie

 Locate the following in sequence as they occur in the Latin passage in Exercise Id:

 1. All singular verbs; all plural verbs.

 2. All nouns in the nominative singular, the accusative singular, the nominative plural, and the accusative plural.

 3. All infinitives.

 The Roman Villa

 In cities, the majority of Romans lived in apartment buildings called Insulae, which were several stories high; Cornelius, on the other hand, being a wealthy Roman, owned a self-contained house called a domus. We shall learn more of these town houses when Cornelius and his family reach Rome.

 Like other rich Romans, Cornelius also had a house in the country. His farmhouse or villa rustica near Baiae in Campania was similar to one actually discovered at Boscoreale near Pompeii. The ground plan of that villa is shown on the next page. The lower illustration on the next page includes the piscina in Cornelius’ villa.

 The villa itself served two purposes: it housed the slaves who did the agricultural work, and it provided accommodation for the owner and his family when they went to the country from Rome, which they would usually do during the summer months to escape the noisy bustle and heat of the city. In addition to housing the owner’s family and slaves, the villa rustica had stables, two enclosed courts or farmyards, rooms for pressing grapes and olives, and an adjacent area for threshing.

 Various features of the villa rustica are described as follows by an ancient author who wrote a book on farming:

 The room of the overseer (vllicus) should be near the entrance, and he should know who enters or leaves at night and what he is carrying, especially if there is no doorkeeper. Special care needs to be taken with the placement of the kitchen because many things are done there in the predawn hours, with food being prepared and eaten. You must see to it that the sheds in the farmyard are large enough for the wagons and all the other farming tools that might be harmed by the rain. . . . On a large farm (fundus) it is more convenient to have two farmyards, one with an exposed pool with running water, surrounded if you wish with columns—a sort of fishpond (piscina). The cattle will drink and bathe here in the summer when brought back from plowing the fields, and also the geese, hogs, and pigs when they return from pasture. In the outer farmyard there should be a pool where lupines can be soaked along with other products that are made more fit for use by immersion in water.

 Varro, On Agriculture 1.13

 ■

 PLAN OF VILLA RUSTICA

 If Cornelius had been a very wealthy Roman, he might have had a country house separate from the farmhouse or even with no farm attached to it—just a large house standing in its own spacious grounds. This type of house was called a villa urbana. Some Romans had more than one of these and often such houses were very luxurious indeed. The Roman author Pliny describes his Laurentine villa urbana for us in a letter to a friend. Here is part of his description, and on the next page you will find a plan and a drawing of his country house:

 My villa is large enough for my use and cheap to keep up. It has a modest entrance-hall (atrium) through which you enter D-shaped colonnades which enclose a small but pleasant courtyard. This provides protection in bad weather, as it is sheltered by windows and overhanging eaves. In the middle of this there is a very pleasant inner court, opening into a fairly handsome dining room which juts out over the shore. On each wall there is either a folding door or an equally large window. From the sides and front there are views of the sea. Look back and there is a view of the inner court, the colonnade, the outer court, and the hall, with the woods and mountains in the distance.

 Pliny, Letters II .17

 Pliny had another villa urbana in Tuscany with luxurious fountains, pools, and baths which he describes as follows:

 Opposite the dining-room at the corner of the colonnade is a large bedroom. From some of its windows you look onto the terrace, from others onto the meadow, while the windows in front overlook an ornamental pool which is a pleasure both to see and hear. For the water, falling from a height, foams white in the marble basin. The bedroom is very warm in winter, being so exposed to the sun, and on a cloudy day the hot air from the nearby furnace takes the place of the sun’s heat. From here you pass through a spacious and pleasant changing-room into the “cold bath” room in which there is a large bath out of the full sunlight. But if you want more space to swim in and warmer water, there is a pool in the courtyard and near it a fountain in which you can cool yourself if you’ve had enough of the heat.

 And later in the same letter he tells us why he liked this house so much:

 I can relax there with fuller and more carefree enjoyment. I need never wear a toga; nobody calls from next door. All is calm and quiet, which makes the place healthy, as do the clear sky and pure air. There I enjoy health of body and mind, for I keep my mind in training by study and my body by hunting.

 37

 Pliny, Letters V.6

 PLINY’S VILLA URBANA

 An Early Rise

 Nondum lucet, sed Aurelia, mater Marci et Corneliae, iam in villa occupata est. Irata est quod servos sedentes conspicit.

 “Agite, molesti servi!” inquit. “Cur nihil facitis? Cur vos ibi sedetis? Cur non strenue laboratis? Omnia statim parare necesse est quod nos hodie Romam redimus.” Iam strenue laborant servi. 5

 Tum pueros excitare parat. Intrat igitur cubiculum Marci. Clamat, “Age, Marce! Tempus est surgere. Nos ad urbem redire paramus.”

 Marcus matrem audit sed nihil respondet. Deinde Aurelia cubiculum Sexti intrat. Clamat, “Age, Sexte! Tempus est surgere.” Statim surgit Sextus. Celeriter tunicam induit et brevi tempore e cubiculo currit. 10

 Iterum Aurelia cubiculum Marci intrat. Iterum clamat, “Age, Marce! Nos iam strenue laboramus. Cur tu solus non surgis?”

 Gemit Marcus. “Ego non surgo,” inquit, “quod Romam redire nolo. Cur mihi quoque necesse est ad urbem redire? Patrem meum princeps ad urbem revocat. Patrem consulere vult. Non vult consulere Marcum.” 15 Subito intrat Gaius, pater Marci, et clamat, “Sed ego volo consulere Marcum! Cur, Marce, hodie me vexas? Cur non surgis? Cur nondum tunicam induis, moleste puer?”

 Nihil respondet Marcus, sed statim surgit quod patrem timet.

 nondum, not yet lucet, it is light, it is day Age! Agite! Come on! vos, you (plural) strenue, strenuously, hard omnia, everything nos, we, us

 excitare, to rouse, wake (someone) up

 intrat, (he, she) enters cubiculum, room, bedroom tempus, time surgere, to get up deinde, then, next celeriter, quickly induit, (he, she) puts on iterum, again, a second time mihi, for me

 39

 Exercise 8a

 Responde Latine:

 1. Cur est Aurelia Irata?

 2. Cur necesse est omnia statim parare?

 3. Quid Aurelia in cubiculo Marci clamat?

 4. Quid facit Marcus?

 5. Surgitne Sextus?

 6. Quid facit Sextus?

 7. Cur Marcus non surgit?

 8. Quis subito intrat?

 9. Cur Marcus surgit?

 Exercise 8b

 Using story 8 as a guide , give the Latin for:

 1. It is necessary to work hard and prepare everything immediately because we are returning to Rome.

 2. Aurelia enters Marcus’ bedroom but does not wake him up.

 3. “Come, Marcus! Why don’t you get up?”

 4. “Why do I have to return to the city?”

 5. Gaius wishes to consult Marcus.

 VERBS: Persons

 Look at these sentences:

 Romam redire nolo.

 Cur non surgis?

 Aurelia cubiculum Marci intra t.

 Iterum clama t Ad urbem redire paramus.

 Cur non strenue labora tis? Liberi in agris erra nt. Servos laborantes spectauf.

 I do not want to return to Rome. Why do you not get up?

 Aurelia goes into Marcus' bedroom. She calls again.

 We are preparing to return to the city.

 Why do you not work hard?

 The children wander in the fields. They watch the slaves working.

 The ending of the verb tells us who is doing something, i.e., whether the subject is 1st, 2nd, or 3rd person , singular or plural (I, you, he, she, it, we, you, they). In the 3rd person the subject may be a noun (e.g., Aurelia and liberi). The personal pronouns ego, tu, nos, and vos are used only for emphasis.

 These personal endings always have the same meaning wherever they occur.

 Note that the vowel that precedes the personal endings is short before final -t and -nt.

 The following verb is irregular, but it uses the same endings as above (except for -m in place of -6 in the first person singular).

 Be sure to learn all of the forms above thoroughly.

 Exercise 8c

 Take parts , read aloud , and translate:

 1 NARRATOR: Sextus est laetus.

 MARCUS: Tu es laetus, Sexte. Cur?

 SEXTUS: Ego sum laetus quod Romam redire volo.

 2. NARRATOR: Servi sunt defessi.

 MARCUS: Vos estis defessi, servi. Cur?

 SERVI: Defessi sumus quod strenue laboramus.

 3. NARRATOR: Cornelius epistulas legit.

 CORNELIA: Quid legis, Corneli?

 CORNELIUS: Epistulas lego.

 4. NARRATOR: Marcus ramum arripit.

 SEXTUS: Quid arripis, Marce?

 MARCUS: Ramum arripio.

 5. NARRATOR: Cornelia ridet.

 FLAVIA: Cur rides, Cornelia?

 CORNELIA: Rideo quod laeta sum.

 6. NARRATOR: Senatores ad urbem redeunt.

 AURELIA: Cur ad urbem reditis, senatores?

 SENATORES: Redimus quod princeps nos consulere vult.

 7. NARRATOR: Pueri lupum non timent.

 PUELLAE: Cur lupum non timetis, pueri?

 PUERI: Lupum non timemus quod temerarii sumus.

 8. NARRATOR. Puellae cantant.

 PUERi: Cur cantatis, puellae?

 PUELLAE: Cantamus quod laetae sumus.

 Exercise 8d

 Read, aloud and translate:

 1. Cur e villa in silvam saepe ambulatis, puellae?

 2. In eadem silva pueri quoque ambulant.

 3. Irata sum quod servos sedentes conspicio.

 4. Cur sedes adhuc in arbore, Sexte?

 5. Arbores ascendimus quod lupi nos terrent.

 6. “Sexte! Marce!” clamat Cornelia. “Cur non surgitis?”

 7. “Eheu!” inquit Davus. “Semper ego laboro; semper me vexant pueri; ad Britanniam redire volo.”

 8. Omnia paramus quod Romam hodie redimus.

 9. Pueros excito quod ad urbem redire hodie paramus.

 10. Servi in villa sedent; neque Aureliam audiunt neque respondent, nam defessi sunt.

 nam, for

 Versiculi: "Time to Go Home,” page 90.

 Word Study II

 Latin Verbs into English Verbs

 Often Latin verbs come into English with only minor changes. Some verbs drop the letters -are, -ere, -ere, or -ire from the infinitive and replace them with silent -e. For example, excitare (to rouse) becomes excite in English. Other verbs simply drop these letters from the infinitive. For example, descendere (to go down) produces the English descend.

 Sometimes additional minor spelling changes occur. For example, exclamare (to shout out) becomes exclaim in English, adding an i in the process.

 Exercise 1

 Identify the English verbs derived from these Latin verbs. Be sure that you know the meaning of the English verb; in many cases it has the same meaning as the Latin verb.

 extendere salutare revocare respondere surgere

 repellere vexare tradere errare ascendere

 Latin Verbs into English Nouns and Adjectives

 A Latin verb may be the source of an English noun or adjective. For example, errare (to wander) provides English with the noun error and the adjective erratic.

 Exercise 2

 The English words in italics below are derived from the Latin verbs in parentheses. Determine the meaning of the English word from the meaning of the Latin verb. Is the English word a noun or an adjective?

 1. Cornelius was not moved by the runaway slave’s petition, (petere)

 2. Sextus’ rude behavior was repellent to Cornelia and Flavia, (repellere)

 3. With the advent of summer, Cornelius moves his family to their farmhouse at Baiae. (advenire)

 4. Cornelius was dictating a lerter to his scribe, (scribere)

 5. “Sextus,” scolded Eucleides, “your writing is not legible.” (legere)

 6. The insurgent senators were severely punished by the emperor, (surgere)

 7. The Roman army found the descent from the mountain more difficult than the ascent, (descendere, ascendere)

 One Latin Word into Many English Words

 Some Latin words are the source of several English words, representing different parts of speech. For example, urbs (city) is the source of:

 1. urban

 2. urbane

 3. urbanity

 4. urbanize

 5. suburb

 adjective, meaning “pertaining to a city” adjective, meaning “elegant and polished in manner” (How does this idea relate to urbs?) noun, meaning “politeness, courtesy, the quality of being urbane”

 verb, meaning “to change from country to city” noun, meaning “a residential area at the edge of a city”

 Exercise 3

 The words in each group below are derived from one Latin word. Identify the Latin word. With its meaning in mind, determine the meaning of each English word. Finally, give the part of speech of each English word.

 1. magnate , magnificent , magnify

 2. contemporary , tempo , temporal

 3. prince , principal , principally

 4. inscribe y scribble , subscribe

 5. paternal , paternity , patron

 Exercise 4

 In the preamble to the Constitution of the United States, there are 22 different words derived from Latin, printed in italics below. Choose five of these words and look up their derivation in an English dictionary. Report on your findings to the class.

 We the people of the United States , in order to form a more perfect union , establish justice , insure domestic tranquillity , provide for the common defense , promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity , do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America.

 Try this exercise on other famous passages, such as The Declaration of Independence, Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address, and Martin Luther King’s speech, “I Have a Dream.”

 Goodbye

 Cornelia, ubi surgit, e villa sua furtim ambulat et per agros ad villam amicae currit. Nondum lucet, sed nihil Corneliam terret. Nemo eam conspicit. Nulli servi in agris laborant. Etiam ianitor ad ianuam villae dormit. Cornelia, quod tacite intrat, ianitorem non excitat.

 Cornelia cubiculum Flaviae tacite intrat et eam excitare temptat. Adhuc 5 dormit Flavia. Iterum temptat Cornelia. Flavia semisomna, “Quis es? Cur me vexas?”

 Cornelia respondet, “Sum Cornelia! Surge!”

 Flavia surgit. Laeta Corneliam excipit et clamat, “Quid tu hic?”

 Cornelia, “Tace, Flavia! Noli servos excitare! Veni tacite mecum in agros. 10 Ibi nemo nos audire potest.”

 Cornelia Flaviam furtim e villa in agros ducit. Ubi puellae ad arbores adveniunt, Cornelia, “Misera sum,” inquit, “quod ego et Marcus et Sextus et pater et mater Romam hodie redire paramus. Princeps patrem meum consulere vult. Nobis igitur necesse est statim discedere.” 15

 Flavia clamat, “Cur statim, Cornelia? Cur non pater tuus discedit solus? Cur vos omnes simul disceditis?”

 Respondet Cornelia, “Nescio, Flavia. Sed nobis secunda hora discedere necesse est.”

 Flavia lacrimat, “O me miseram! Vos omnes Romam reditis. Mihi ne- 20 cesse est hic manere. Vale, Cornelia! Multas epistulas ad me mitte! Pro-mittisne?”

 Cornelia, “Ego promitto. Et iam vale!” Cornelia Flaviam complexu tenet et lacrimans abit.

 sua, her own

 per agros, through the fields nemo, no one nulli, no

 ianitor, doorkeeper ad ianuam, at the door tacite, silently temptare, to try semisomna, half-asleep hie, here Tace! Be quiet!

 Noll . . . excitare! Don’t wake (someone) up! mecum, with me misera, unhappy, miserable nobis, for us

 discedere, to go away vos omnes, all of you simul, together nescio, I do not know secunda hora, at the second hour (of daylight)

 lacrimare, to weep, cry O me miseram! Poor me! Oh dear me!

 manere, to remain Vale! Goodbye! mittere, to send promittere, to promise complexu, in an embrace tenet, (he, she) holds lacrimans, weeping

 Exercise 9a

 Responde Latine:

 1. Quo Cornelia currit?

 2. Cur nemo Corneliam conspicit?

 3. Quid facit ianitor?

 4. Quid facit Cornelia ubi cubiculum Flaviae intrat?

 5. Quo Cornelia Flaviam ducit?

 6. Quis lacrimans abit?

 Prepositions

 Look at the examples in the columns below:

 In villam currit.

 He runs into the house.

 In rivum cadit.

 He falls into the river.

 In urbem venit.

 He comes into the city.

 In villa sedet.

 He sits in the house.

 In rfvd natat.

 He swims in the river.

 In ramo sedet.

 He sits on the branch.

 Princeps in urbe est.

 The emperor is in the city.

 In the left-hand column, in is used with the accusative case and the meaning is into.

 In the right-hand column, in is used with the ablative case and the meaning

 • a* yy a yy

 is in or on.

 Other prepositions that you have seen with the accusative case are ad, per, and prope.

 Ad villam redit.

 He returns to the house.

 Ad ianuam dormit.

 He sleeps at the door.

 Per agros currit.

 He runs through the fields.

 Puellae prope rivum sedent.

 The girls sit near the stream.

 Other prepositions that you have seen with the ablative case are sub and ex:

 Sub arbore dormit.

 He sleeps under the tree.

 Ex arbore cadit.

 He falls out of the tree.

 Note that ex may be written simply as e when the next word begins with a consonant: e ramls, “out of the branches.”

 From now on, Latin prepositions in the word lists will indicate in parentheses whether they are followed by the accusative or the ablative case, e.g., ad ( + acc.) and sub ( + abl.).

 NOUNS: Cases and Declensions

 Ablative Case

 Here is a table showing the groups of nouns and cases you have met so far:

 Be sure to learn these forms thoroughly.

 Note that the only difference between the nominative and ablative singular endings of 1st declension nouns is that the ablative has a long vowel: -a.

 Exercise 9b

 Select, read aloud, and translate:

 Exercise 9c

 Read aloud and translate:

 1. Marcus in villam currit. Nuntius in villa est.

 2. Davus in horto laborat. Marcus in hortum festinat.

 3. Nuntius in Italiam redire vult. Cornelius in Italia habitat.

 4. Puer in arbore sedet. Puella in villam intrat.

 5. In agris pueri ambulare parant. Puellae in agros lente ambulant.

 6. In Italia sunt multi servi. Alii in agris laborant, alii in urbibus.

 7. Servi sub arboribus sedere volunt.

 8. Servus ex arbore cadit; ad villam currit; in villa dormit.

 9. Alii nuntii ex urbe celeriter veniunt; alii ad urbem redeunt.

 10. Puellae sub ramis sedent. Lupus ad puellas currit.

 11. Puer ex arbore descendere non potest.

 12. Cornelia per ianuam in villam Flavianam fOrtim intrat.

 alii . . . alii . . . , some . . . others . . .

 Exercise 9d

 Select , read aloud , and translate:

 1. Flavia clamat, “Ubi ,

 Cornelia?”

 2. Cornelia ianitorem non

 3. Nos omnes hodie Romam

 4. Cur vos omnes simul ?

 5. Cur patrem , Marce?

 6. Necesse est epistulas statim

 7. Princeps senatores 

 8. Tace, Flavia! Noli servos

 9. Cornelia amicam in agros

 10. Cur per agros ,

 puellae?

 11. Ianitor Corneliam non

 estis / es

 excitare / excitat / excitas

 redire / redimus / reditis

 discedere / discedimus / discedere paratis

 vexo / times / amatis tradit / legere / legimus

 consulere vult / consulere volunt excitamus / excitare / surgere

 adveniunt / ducit / amat

 curritis / excitatis / curris

 audio / audiunt / audit

 dormimus / surgere / surgo nolo / faciunt / videtis Servos / Servi / Servus

 puellas / puellae / puella Romanos / Romani / Romanum

 Exercise 9e

 Using story 9 as a guide, give the Latin for:

 1. Cornelia tries to wake Flavia up.

 2. We are preparing to return to Rome today.

 3. Why are you all leaving at the same time?

 4. Send many letters to me! Do you promise?

 5. Cornelia goes off in tears.

 Versiculi: "Bad News," page 90.

 Departure

 Interea in villa Corneliana omnes strenue laborant. Aurelia multas ancillas habet. Eas iubet tunicas et stolas in cistis ponere. In cubiculo Marci servus togam praetextam in cista ponit quod in urbe omnes pueri togam praetextam gerere solent. In cubiculo GaiI servus togam parat quod Gaius in urbe togam gerere solet. 5

 Davus, qui ipse omnia curat, ad ianuam stat. Servos iubet cistas e cubiculis in viam portare. Baculum habet et clamat, “Agite, servi scelesti! Dormltisne? Hodie, non cras, discedimus.”

 Marcus quoque servos incitat et iubet eos cistas in raeda ponere. Servus quidam, nomine Geta, cistam Sexti arripit et in raedam iacit. 10

 “Cave, Geta!” exclamat Sextus sollicitus. “Cura cistam meam! Noli eam iacere!”

 Tandem omnes cistae in raeda sunt. Ascendunt Marcus et Sextus. Ascendit Eucleides. Ascendit Aurelia. Gaius ipse ascendere est paratus. Syrus, raedarius, quoque ascendit et equos incitare parat. Subito exclamat Aurelia, 15 “Ubi est Cornelia?”

 Eo ipso tempore in viam currit Cornelia. Eam Gaius iubet in raedam statim ascendere. Statim raedarius equos incitat. Discedunt Cornelii.

 50

 interea, meanwhile ancilla, slave-woman habere, to have, hold iubere, to order

 ;

 cista, trunk, chest ponere, to place

 gerere solent, (they) are accustomed to wear, usually wear ipse, himself

 curare, to look after, attend to stare, to stand via, road portare, to carry

 baculum, a stick scelestus, wicked

 eras, tomorrow -fen 0

 incitare, to spur on, urge on raeda, carriage

 servus quidam, a certain slave iacere, to throw paratus, ready raedarius, coachman equus, horse

 eo ipso tempore, at that very moment

 t * enduia ^ -^Uey

 Exercise 10 a

 Responde Latine:

 1. Quid Aurelia ancillas facere iubet?

 2. Cur togam praetextam in cista ponit servus?

 3. Quid facit Davus?

 4. Quid clamat Sextus?

 5. Quid raedarius facere parat?

 6. Quo currit Cornelia?

 7. Quid tum facit raedarius?

 8. Quid faciunt Cornelii?

 VERBS: Conjugations

 Latin verbs, with very few exceptions, fall into four major groups or conjugations. You can distinguish the group or conjugation of a verb by looking at two parts—the 1st person singular of the present tense and the present infinitive. For example:

 Note the differences between verbs of the 2nd and 3rd conjugations. Note also that some verbs of the 3rd conjugation end in -id in the 1st person singular of the present tense.

 Hereafter, verbs will be given in the word lists in the 1st person singular form (present tense), followed by the present infinitive and conjugation number, e.g., habed, habere (2), to have. The few exceptions that do not fit neatly into any of the four conjugations will be marked as irregular ( irreg .).

 VERBS: The Present Tense

 Be sure to learn these forms thoroughly.

 Note that the vowel that precedes the personal endings is short before final -t and -nt.

 In addition to iacio, iacere, you have met the following -id verbs of the 3rd conjugation:

 arripio, arripere excipio, excipere

 conspicio, conspicere facio, facere

 Exercise 10b

 Read the following verbs aloud and give the conjugation number and

 meaning of each: ascendo, ascendere z terreo, terrere y arripio, arripere discedo, discedere 4 audio, audire

 repello, repellere ambulo, ambulare - excito, excitare } iacio, iacere } curro, currere

 ) curo, curare 3 excipio, excipere Umeo, timere nescio, nescire ^ rideo, ridere

 Exercise 10c

 Using the verbs in Exercise 10b, give the Latin for the following:

 1. We are running.

 2. You (singular) are afraid.

 3. They drive the wolf back.

 4. We hear the noise.

 5. You (plural) throw the chest.

 6. I snatch the branch.

 7. They go away.

 8. They welcome the girls.

 9. You (singular) frighten Cornelia.

 10. We climb the tree.

 11. We wake the boys up.

 12. I throw the stick.

 13. I run to the farmhouse.

 14. They hear the voice.

 15. They snatch the letter.

 16. You (singular) go away.

 17. You (singular) hear the noise.

 18. We hear the voice.

 19. We throw the stick.

 20. We drive the wolf back.

 VERBS: Imperative

 The imperative is the part of the verb used in issuing orders, e.g.:

 Cura cistam meam, Geta!

 Take care of my trunk, Geta!

 Curate cistam meam, servi! Take care of my trunk , slaves!

 Noll earn iacere, Geta!

 Don’t throw it, Geta! (literally, refuse, be unwilling to throw it, Geta!)

 Nolite earn iacere, servl!

 Don’t throw it, slaves! (literally, refuse, be unwilling to throw it, slaves!)

 Be sure to learn these forms thoroughly.

 Exercise 10 d

 Read aloud and translate:

 1. Davus omnes strenue laborare iubet.

 2. “Tunicam, non togam, gerere volo,” clamat Marcus.

 3. In urbe Gaius togam gerere solet.

 4. Eo ipso tempore Aurelia, “Cave!” inquit. “Noli cistam iacere!”

 5. Eucleides, “Nolite dormire!” clamat. “Strenue laborate, servi!”

 6. “Cur non in raedam ascenditis, pueri?” “Non ascendimus quod nondum parati sumus.”

 7. “Audlsne vocem Cornelii, Sexte?” “Ita vero! Eius vocem audio.”

 8. Flavia, “Scribe ad me saepe!” inquit. Cornelia, “Ego promitto,” respondet.

 9. Gaius, “Ascendite, omnes!” inquit. “Eucleides, cura pueros! Cornelia, sede prope matrem! Aurelia, noli lacrimare! Syre, incita equos!”

 10. “Quid tu aestate facere potes, Marce?” “Possum in agris currere, arbores ascendere, in rivo natare, prope piscinam sedere.”

 Versiculi: "To Rome Tomorrow," page 91.

 Treatment of Slaves

 Some masters treated their slaves well and were rewarded by loyalty and good service, but, even when conditions were good, slaves were keenly aware of their inferior position and by way of protest sometimes rebelled or tried to run away. If they were recaptured, the letters FUG (for fugitivus, “runaway”) were branded on their foreheads.

 Some owners treated their slaves very badly. Even if the owner were not as bad as the despised Vedius Pollio, who fed his slaves to lampreys, slaves were liable to be severely punished, often at the whim of their master:

 Does Rutilus believe that the body and soul of slaves are made the same as their masters? Not likely! Nothing pleases him more than a noisy flogging.

 His idea of music is the crack of the whip. To his trembling slaves he's a monster, happiest when some poor wretch is being branded with red-hot irons for stealing a pair of towels. He loves chains, dungeons, branding, and chain-gang labor camps. He’s a sadist.

 Juvenal, Satires XIV. 16

 There were also large numbers of female slaves, and even they were often subjected to ill-treatment. Juvenal tells how a slave-woman was at the mercy of her mistress:

 If the mistress is in a bad mood, the wool-maid is in trouble, the dressers are stripped and beaten, the litter-bearers accused of coming late. The rods are broken over one poor wretch’s back, another has bloody weals from the whip, and a third is flogged with the cat-o’-nine-tails. The slave-girl arranging her mistress’s hair will have her own hair tom and the tunic ripped from her shoulders, because a curl is out of place.

 Juvenal, Satires VI.475

 Pliny tells a story about some slaves who tried to murder their master:

 Larcius Macedo was a cruel, arrogant master, and he suffered a terrible fate at the hands of his slaves. He was taking a bath at his house at Formiae when his slaves suddenly surrounded him. One grabbed his throat while others punched him in the face, chest, and stomach. When they thought he was dead, they threw him on the hot paving-stones to see if they were right. Either because he was really unconscious or only pretending, he lay there motionless, so that they believed he was quite dead. Then he was

 carried out as though he had fainted with the heat. The more loyal slaves took over; the maids came running with shrieks and screams. Roused by their cries and revived by the cool air, he opened his eyes and moved, showing that he was alive, now that it was safe to do so. The guilty slaves ran away. Most have been arrested; the rest are still being hunted. Macedo was nursed back to life, but a few days later he died. At least he had the satisfaction of knowing he was avenged. Before their victim died, the culprits suffered the penalty for murder.

 Pliny, Letters III.J4

 On the other hand, Tacitus speaks of “slaves whose loyalty did not waver under torture. ” There were owners who treated their slaves fairly and sympathetically. In a letter to a friend Pliny writes:

 I have noticed how kindly you treat your slaves; so I shall openly admit my own easy treatment of my own slaves. I always keep in mind the Roman phrase, “father of the household.” But even supposing I were naturally cruel and unsympathetic, my heart would be touched by the illness of my freedman Zosimus. He needs and deserves my sympathy; he is honest, obliging, and well educated. He is a very successful actor with a clear delivery. He plays the lyre well and is an accomplished reader of speeches, history, and poetry.

 A few years ago he began to spit blood and I sent him to Egypt. He has just come back with his health restored. However, he has developed a slight cough. I think it would be best to send him to your place at Forum Julii where the air is healthy and the milk excellent for illness of this kind.

 Pliny, Letters V. 19

 It was possible for a slave to buy his freedom if he could save enough from the small personal allowance he earned; some masters gave their slaves their freedom as a reward for long service. A slave who had been set free was called a libertus. Many who were freed and became rich used to hide with “patches’' the marks which had been made on their bodies and faces when they were slaves.

 I am very upset by illness among my slaves. Some of them have actually died, including even younger men. In cases like this I find comfort in two thoughts. I am always ready to give my slaves their freedom, so I don't think their deaths so untimely if they die free men. I also permit my slaves to make a “will,” which I consider legally binding.

 Pliny, Letters VIII. 16

 Gaius, a jurist of the second century a.d. , mentions certain legal measures which were introduced to check the ill-treatment of slaves:

 But at this time neither Roman citizens nor subjects of the Empire may maltreat their slaves excessively or without good reason; for, under a regulation of the emperor Antoninus, to kill one’s own slave without reason is just as serious an offense as killing another man’s slave. Excessively harsh treatment by owners is also controlled by a regulation of the same emperor.

 He ruled that in the case of slaves who had fled for refuge to the shrines of the gods or to the statues of the emperors, the owners should be compelled to sell their slaves if their treatment was intolerably harsh.

 Gaius, Institutes 1.53

 Columella, a Roman writer on agriculture, recommends securing a reliable slave as overseer (vflicus) of a farm:

 I advise you not to choose an overseer from slaves who are physically attractive nor from those that have practiced the refinements of the city. These slaves are lazy and sleepy and accustomed to leisure, the Campus, the Circus, the theater, gambling, food-shops, and other such attractions and constantly day-dream of such nonsense. You should rather choose a slave hardened with farm work from infancy and tested by experience.

 Friendliness and respect on the part of the master toward his slaves pay off:

 I would speak on quite familiar terms with my country slaves (if they have behaved themselves) more frequently than I would with my city slaves. And, since I have noticed that their constant toil is lightened by this friendliness of their master, I sometimes even joke with them and allow them to joke even more. Nowadays, I often consult with them about some new task as if they knew more about it than I, and this way I find out what sort of ability and intelligence each one has. Then, too, I notice that they undertake a task more willingly if they think they have been consulted about it and are undertaking it according to their own advice.

 Columella, On Agriculture 1.8

 A Slave Runs Away

 Omnes Cornelii iam sunt in raeda. Romam per Viam Appiam petunt. Interea in villa Davus est sollicitus. Davus est vllicus Cornelii et, si dominus abest, vllicus ipse villam domini curat. Davus igitur omnes servos in aream quae est prope villam venire iubet. Brevi tempore area est plena servorum et ancillarum qui magnum clamorem faciunt. 5

 Tum venit Davus ipse et, ‘Tacete, omnes!” magna voce clamat. “Audite me! Quamquam dominus abest, necesse est nobis strenue laborare.”

 Tum servi mussant, “Davus dominus esse vult. Ecce! Baculum habet. Nos verberare potest. Necesse est igitur facere id quod iubet.” Redeunt igitur ad agros servi quod baculum vllicl timent. 10

 Sed non redit Geta. Neque vllicum amat neque Iram vllicl timet. Illa nocte igitur, quod in agris non iam laborare vult, cibum parat et e villa effugit. Nemo eum videt, nemo eum impedit. Nunc per agros, nunc per viam festinat. Ubi dies est, in ramis arboris se celat. Ibi dormit.

 Interea, quamquam nondum lucet, Davus omnes servos excitat. In agros 15 exire et ibi laborare eos iubet. Sed Getam non videt. Ubi est Geta? Davus igitur est Iratus, deinde sollicitus. Ad portam villae stat et viam spectat; sed Getam non videt.

 Via Appia, the Appian Way vllicus, overseer, farm manager dominus, master

 absum, abesse ( irreg .), to be away, absent

 area, open space, threshing-floor plenus, full quamquam, although musso, mussare (1), to mutter verbero, verberare (1), to beat

 id quod, that which, what Ira, anger

 illa nocte, that night cibus, food

 effugio, effugere (3), to run away, escape

 impedio, impedire (4), to hinder nunc, now

 se celare, to hide (himself) porta, gate

 58

 NOUNS: Cases and Declensions

 Genitive Case

 Compare the following sentences:

 Davus ad portam stat.

 Davus stands near the door.

 Servi baculum timent.

 The slaves fear the stick.

 In ramis se celat.

 He hides in the branches.

 Davus ad portam villae stat. Davus stands near the door of the farmhouse.

 Servi baculum vllicl timent.

 The slaves fear the overseers stick.

 In ramis arboris se celat.

 He hides in the branches of the tree.

 In the right-hand column other nouns have been added to the sentences of the left-hand column. These additional nouns are in the genitive case. This case is used to connect two nouns in a single phrase, e.g., portam villae. It often indicates possession, e.g., baculum vllicl.

 This table shows the declensions and cases you have met so far:

 Be sure to learn these forms thoroughly.

 Hereafter, nouns will be given in the word lists as follows: puella, -ae (f ); servus, -I (m); vox, vocis (/*); i.e., the nominative singular (puella), the genitive singular (puellae), and the gender {feminine ).

 N.B. It is the genitive singular ending which indicates the declension to which a noun belongs.

 Exercise 11a

 Translate the following sentences , completing them •where necessary with reference to the family tree:

 1. Marcus est frater Corneliae.

 2. Cornelia est soror Marci.

 3. Aurelia est uxor Cornelii.

 4. Marcus est filius Aureliae.

 5. Cornelia est Cornelii.

 6. Cornelius et Aurelia sunt Marci et Corneliae.

 7. Marcus et Cornelia sunt Cornelii et Aureliae.

 8. Aurelia est Marci et Corneliae.

 9. Cornelius est Marci et Corneliae.

 Exercise llb

 Supply the ending , read the sentence aloud , and translate:

 1. Liber! in raeda senator sunt.

 2. Marcus est frater Corneli 

 3. Nuntius filium Corneli salutat.

 4. Servi Iram vllic timent.

 5. Effugit Geta et in ramis arbor se celat.

 6. Magna vox Dav eum terret.

 7. Davus, vllicus Corneli , Getam videre non potest.

 8. Si Cornelius abest, Davus villam domin curat.

 9. Magnus numerus liber est in area.

 numerus, -I (m), number

 Exercise lie

 Using story 11 as a guide , give the Latin for:

 1. The overseer looks after the master’s farmhouse.

 2. In a short time the threshing-floor is full of slaves.

 3. The slaves fear the overseer’s stick.

 4. Geta is afraid of Davus’ anger.

 5. Geta is sleeping in the branches of a tree.

 Building Up the Meaning III

 In the 1st and 2nd declensions, the endings of the genitive singular are the same as the endings of the nominative plural. To decide which case is used, you must look for further clues.

 Look at these sentences:

 1. Celeriter redeunt servi.

 The genitive usually forms a phrase with another noun. Since servl is the only noun in the sentence, it must be nominative plural.

 2. Puerl pater est senator Romanus.

 The word puerl could be genitive singular or nominative plural. It is only when we reach pater (which can only be nominative singular) and est (which is a singular verb) that we know that puerl must be genitive singular, forming a phrase with pater, i.e., “the boy’s father.”

 3a. In agris domini servi strenue laborant.

 3b. In agris domin! servos habent.

 In 3a domini and servl cannot both be nominative plural since they are not linked by et. One of them, therefore, must be genitive singular. There is a second clue: the order of the words suggests that domini forms a phrase with in agrls and that servl is the subject of laborant.

 In 3b domini could be genitive singular or nominative plural, but it makes more sense to take domini as the subject of habent than to assume some unknown subject.

 4. In villa puerl sedent.

 Again, puerl could be genitive singular or nominative plural. Only the context will help you to decide whether the sentence means The boys sit in the house , or They sit in the boys house.

 Capture

 Davus est sollicitus, nam necesse est Getam invenire. Ubi servi effugiunt, domini saepe vllicos reprehendunt. Saepe etiam eos verberant. Cornelius est dominus bonus, sed ubi Cornelius Iratus est —

 Servos igitur Davus in aream statim convocat et rogat, “Ubi est Geta?” Nemo respondere potest. Davus igitur alios servos in hortum, alios in agros, 5 alios in vineas mittit. In horto et agris et vineis Getam petunt. Neque in horto neque in fossis agrorum neque in arboribus vinearum Getam inveniunt.

 Davus igitur servos iubet canes in aream ducere. Alii servi tunicam Getae in aream ferunt. Canes veniunt et tunicam olfaciunt. Mox Davus servos 10 cum canibus in agros ducit. Latrant canes. Per agros Cornelii, deinde per agros vicinarum villarum currunt. Neque rivi neque fossae eos impediunt. Vestigia Getae inveniunt, sed Getam invenire non possunt. Tandem Davus eos in silvam incitat.

 Geta in arbore adhuc manet et ibi dormit. Canes latrantes eum excitant. 15 Nunc tamen Geta effugere non potest et in ramis sedet, immobilis et perterritus. Canes, ubi ad arborem appropinquant, Getam ipsum non conspiciunt, sed olfaciunt. Latrant canes; appropinquant servi. Miserum servum vident qui in ramis arboris se celat.

 “Descende, Geta!” clamat Davus. Geta descendit. Davus eum tunica 20 arripit et baculo verberat. Deinde servos iubet Getam ad villam trahere et in fronte litteras FUG inurere.

 nam, for

 invenio, invenire (4), to find reprehendo, reprehendere (3), to blame, scold bonus, good

 convoco, convocare (1), to call together

 rogo, rogare (1), to ask vinea, -ae if), vineyard fossa, -ae if), ditch canis, canis ( m/f ), dog fero, ferre ( irreg .), to bring, carry

 olfacio, olfacere (3), to catch the scent of, smell mox, soon cum (+ abl .), with latro, latrare (1), to bark vestigia, tracks, footprints, traces tamen, however immobilis, motionless tunica, by the tunic traho, trahere, to drag in fronte litteras inurere, to brand the letters on his forehead

 62

 Exercise 12a

 Responde Latine:

 1. Cur Davus sollicitus est?

 2. Quo Davus servos mittit?

 3. Inveniuntne Getam?

 4. Quid canes faciunt?

 5. Cur Geta effugere non potest?

 6. Ubi servi litteras FUG inurunt?

 NOUNS: Ablative Case

 The ablative case is used both with and without prepositions.

 1. With a preposition, e.g.:

 e rlvo out of the stream

 in horto in the garden

 cum patre with his father

 sub arboribus under the trees

 2. Without a preposition:

 a. Expressions referring to time, e.g.:

 septima hora illa nocte nocte

 tribus diebus aestate

 at the seventh hour on that night at night in three days in summer

 brevi tempore in a short time

 b. Other uses of the ablative without a preposition can often be translated “by” or “with,” e.g.:

 Getam tunica arripit. He seizes Geta by the tunic.

 Servum baculo verberat. He beats the slave with a stick.

 c. Sometimes English requires a different form of expression, e.g.:

 Magna voce clamat. He shouts loudly (literally, in a loud

 voice).

 Servus, nomine Geta, ... a slave called Geta (literally, Geta

 by name), . . .

 Exercise 12b

 Supply the ending, read aloud, and translate:

 1. E vlll currit Gaius ipse.

 2. Vllicus ancillam tunic arripit.

 3. Servus, nomin Geta, effugit.

 4. Quis togas in cist ponit?

 5. Per vias urbis cum patr ambulare volo.

 6. Davus servos iubet canes ex agr in aream ducere.

 Exercise 12c

 Select , read aloud , and translate:

 1. Geta in se celat.

 2. Prope villae servi stant.

 3. Alii in , alii in

 sedent.

 4. Servi in fossis Getam non

 vident.

 5. Davus servos cum in agros

 ducit.

 6. Est magnus numerus et

 in villa vicina.

 7. Ubi est vllicus ?

 8. Davus Getam verberat.

 arborem / arbore / arboris portae / portam / porta cubiculum / cubiculo area / areae / aream agris / agri / agros

 canes / canem / canibus

 pueri / pueros / puerorum puellarum / puella / puellam dominus / domino / domini bono / boni / bonum baculum / baculi / baculo

 Exercise 12d

 Read aloud and translate:

 1. Voces servorum in agris audimus.

 2. Puerorum clamores puellae timent.

 3. In villa senatoris Romani sedent amicae Aureliae.

 4. Sub ramis arboris Cornelia sedet.

 5. Omnes Cornelii servi vestigia Getae petunt; brevi tempore eum inveniunt.

 6. E cubiculo Marci servi cistas ferunt.

 7. Liberi cum patre et matre in raedam ascendunt.

 8. Magnus fragor ramorum puellas terret; e ramis arboris cadit subito Sextus.

 Versiculi: "Spoken by Geta," page 91.

 Review II

 Exercise Ila

 Change singulars to plurals and plurals to singulars, keeping the same case:

 Exercise lib

 Read and translate each sentence below with the appropriate form of each of the following verbs:

 porto, portare iacio, iacere habeo, habere

 invenio, invenire pono, ponere

 1. Ego cistam 

 2. Tu cistam 

 3. Puer cistam 

 4. Nos cistam 

 5. Vos cistam 

 6. Pueri cistam 

 7. cistam, puer!

 8. cistam, pueri!

 Exercise lie

 Give the first person singular, infinitive, conjugation number, and meaning of each of the following verbs:

 For example: surgimus

 1. intratis

 2. iubes

 3. habent

 4. impedite

 5. reprehendimus

 6. convoca

 7. rogat

 Answer: surgo, surgere (3), to rise

 8. mane

 9. mussatis

 10. curo

 11. promittis

 12. festinate

 13. verberamus

 14. olfaciunt

 Exercise lid

 Read, the following passage and answer the questions

 Hodie servus vicina ducit. DAVUS:

 SERVUS:

 DAVUS:

 SERVUS:

 DAVUS:

 SERVUS:

 DAVUS:

 SERVUS:

 DAVUS:

 SERVUS:

 DAVUS:

 novus ad vdlam Cornelii venit. Davus eum ex urbe

 Ego sum Davus, vllicus GaiI Cornelii. Gaius Cornelius est senator Romanus. Quod est senator, in urbem saepe redit. Nunc Cornelius, dominus meus, abest sed aestate in villa habitat cum Aurelia et Marco et Cor- 5 nelia et Sexto. Aurelia est uxor Cornelii.

 Sed quis est Marcus?

 Marcus est filius Cornelii et frater Corneliae. Cornelia igitur est filia Cornelii et soror Marci. 10

 Sed quis est Sextus? Estne frater Marci?

 Minime vero! Non est frater sed amicus Marci. Pater Sexti est amicus Cornelii. Pater Sexti non in Italia sed in Asia habitat.

 Sextus cum Marco in Italia habitat. 15

 Suntne multi servi in villa Cornelii?

 Est magnus numerus servorum et ancillarum. Alii servi in villa laborant, alii in agris et in vineis et in olivetis.

 Quid faciunt ancillae? 20

 Togas et tunicas liberorum et parentum curant. Cibum quoque parant.

 Laeti sunt servi GaiI Cornelii. Amantne dominum?

 Ita vero! Sum vllicus viri boni. 25

 novus, new olivetis, olive groves

 1. Who comes to Cornelius’ farmhouse?

 2. Who brings him there?

 3. Why does Cornelius often return to Rome?

 4. Where is Cornelius now?

 5. Who is Marcus?

 6. Who is Cornelia?

 7. Is Sextus Marcus’ brother?

 8. Who is Marcus’ friend?

 9. Where does Sextus’ father live?

 10. In what four places do the slaves work?

 11. What do the slave-women do?

 12. What is the slaves’ attitude toward their master?

 Select the appropriate adjective from the list below to complete each of the following sentences. Be sure to use the right ending on the adjective. Translate each sentence.

 1. Davus ad aream servorum et ancillarum advenit.

 2. Gaius in raedam ascendere est 

 3. Cornelia Flaviam excitare temptat.

 4. Servi e villa effugiunt.

 5. Corneliane villa ambulat et ad villam amicae currit.

 paratus suus plenus semisomnus scelestus

 Exercise Ilf

 Complete the following sentences to match the English:

 1. Cornelia et Marcus et Sextus in villa habitant, (in summer)

 2. Marcus et Sextus sedent, (under the tree)

 3. Nuntius sollicitus currit, (to the farmhouse)

 4. Puer temerarius cadit, (out of the tree)

 5. Cornelia ad villam vicinam furtim ambulat, (that night)

 6. Servus dormit, (at the door)

 7. Cornelius solus epistulam scribit, (in the farmhouse)

 8. Servi per agros currunt, (with the dogs)

 9. Puer molestus cadit, (into the fishpond)

 10. Davus Getam verberat, (with a stick)

 Exercise Ilg

 In the passage in Exercise lid above , find the Latin for.

 1. the house of Cornelius

 2. from the neighboring city

 3. the overseer of Gaius Cornelius

 4. in summer

 5. the wife of Cornelius

 6. the sister of Marcus

 7. the friend of Marcus

 8. with Marcus

 9. large number of slaves and slave-women

 10. in the olive groves

 68

 Disaster

 •StoGfJ

 Vi' &AT

 Interea Cornelii per Viam Appiam iter faciebant. Cornelius, quod ad urbem tribus diebus advfenlre volebat, Syrum identidem iubebat equos incitare. Syrus igitur equos virga verberabat. Dum per viam ibant, Aurelia et Cornelia spectabant rusticos qui in agris laborabant. Marcus et Sextus spectabant omnes raedas quae per Viam Appiam Ibant. 5

 Septima hora erat. Dies erat calidus. In agris rustici non iam laborabant, sed sub arboribus quiescebant. In raeda Cornelius et Aurelia iam dormiebant. Marcus pede vexabat Corneliam quae dormire volebat. Sextus cum raedario Syro sedebat; viam et vehicula spectabat.

 Subito, “Ecce, Marce!” exclamat Sextus. “Est auriga!” 10

 Marcus magno risu respondet, “Non est auriga, fatue! Est tabellarius qui epistulas civium praeclarorum ab urbe fert. Tabellarii semper celeriter iter faciunt quod epistulas ab urbe ad omnes partes Italiae ferunt.”

 “Quam celeriter iter facit!” clamat Sextus. “Equos ferociter virga incitat. Cave tabellarium, Syre! Tene equos! Cave fossam! Cave fossam!” 15

 Syrus equos tenet et tabellarium vitat, sed raeda in fossam magno fragore descendit.

 iter faciebant, (they) were traveling tribus diebus, in three days volebat, (he, she) wanted identidem, again and again iubebat, he ordered, kept ordering virga, -ae (f ), stick verberabat, he kept beating, whipping

 rusticus, -I (m), peasant Ibant, (they) were going septimus, seventh erat, it was

 quiescebant, (they) were resting

 pes, pedis (m), foot vehicula, vehicles auriga, -ae (m), charioteer magno risu, with a loud laugh fatuus, stupid tabellarius, -i ( m ), courier civis, civis (m), citizen praeclarus, distinguished ab or a ( -I- abi), from pars, partis if), part Quam . . . ! How . . . ! ferociter, fiercely vito, vitare (1), to avoid

 69

 Exercise 13a

 Responde Latine:

 1. Quid Cornelii faciebant?

 2. Cur Cornelius Syrum identidem iubebat equos incitare?

 3. Quid faciebat Syrus?

 4. Quid faciebant Aurelia et Cornelia dum per viam Ibant?

 5 . Cur rustici non iam laborabant?

 6. Cur Cornelia non dormiebat?

 7. Ubi sedebat Sextus?

 8. Quis celeriter appropinquat?

 9. Cur tabellarii celeriter iter faciunt?

 10. Quo Instrumento tabellarius equos incitat?

 11. Vltatne Syrus tabellarium?

 12. Quo descendit raeda?

 Quo Instrumento . . . ? With what instrument . . . ?

 How . . . ?

 Exercise 13b

 Using story 13 as a guide, give the Latin for:

 1. Again and again Cornelius kept ordering Syrus to spur on the horses.

 2. While they were going along the road, Marcus and Sextus were looking at all the carriages.

 3. The day was warm and it was the seventh hour.

 4. The peasants were resting under tfie trees, and Cornelius and Aurelia were asleep in the carriage.

 5. Marcus kept annoying Cornelia again and again.

 6. Sextus was looking at a courier who was going along the road.

 7. Couriers quickly carry letters to all parts of Italy.

 8. How fiercely he spurs on the horses with (his) stick!

 9. Syrus avoids the courier but not the ditch.

 VERBS: The Imperfect Tense

 Look at these examples from the story:

 Per Viam Appiam iter faciebant.

 Ad urbem tribus diebus advenire volebat.

 Syrus equos verberabat.

 They were traveling along the V ia Appia.

 He wanted to reach the city in three days.

 Syrus kept whipping the horses.

 The Latin verbs in dark type are examples of the imperfect tense. This tense is easily recognized because the letters -ba appear before the personal ending.

 N.B. The imperfect forms of sum, esse (to be) and possum, posse (to be able) are irregular:

 erat, (he, she, it) was poterat, (he, she, it) was able

 erant, (they) were poterant, (they) were able

 Exercise 13c

 Read aloud , say whether the verb is present or imperfect , and translate:

 1. Cornelia sub arbore sedet.

 2. Flavia in agris ambulabat.

 3. Romani in Italia habitant.

 4. Servi Getam invenire non poterant.

 5. Latrant canes; appropinquant servi.

 6. Marcus et Sextus raedas spectabant.

 7. Rustici erant in agris.

 8. Pueri saepe currunt in agris.

 9. Geta laborare nolebat.

 10. Tabellarii epistulas ab urbe in omnes partes Italiae ferebant.

 Versiculi: "Disaster,” page 92.

 Word Study III

 Latin Suffix -or

 The suffix -or, when added to the base of a Latin verb, creates a 3rd declension noun which means “the act of” or “the result of” that particular verb. The base of a verb is found by subtracting the -are, -ere, -ere, or -ire ending from its infinitive. For example, clamare (base: clam-) becomes clamor, clamoris (m), a shout. The Latin noun formed in this way often comes into English unchanged. The derivative clamor means “a loud outcry.”

 Exercise 1

 Create a 3rd declension noun from each verb below. Give the nominative and genitive singular of the noun. Give an English derivative, if there is one.

 terrere tenere stupere (to be amazed)

 errare timere valere (to be strong)

 English Suffix -(i)fy

 The Latin verb facere (to do, make) is the source of the English verb suffix -(i)fy, meaning “to make. ” The English word beautify means “to make beautiful. ” Often the base to which the suffix is added is also of Latin origin. The Latin word magnus provides the base for the English word magnify , “to make large.”

 Exercise 2

 Identify the English verbs made by adding the suffix -(i)fy to the bases of these Latin words.

 terrere satis (enough)

 qualis unus (one)

 nullus signum (sign)

 Exercise 3

 Match each English word in the column at the left with its meaning in the column at the right. Use the meaning of the Latin word in parentheses as a guide.

 Latin Mottoes

 Although Latin is an ancient language, its words and phrases are still part of our life today. Look at the inscriptions on a penny, nickel, dime, or quarter. Find the Latin words E PLURIBUS UNUM. This is the motto of the United States, meaning “out of many, one. ” It refers to the many colonies which were united to make one nation.

 Many states, universities, and other organizations have Latin mottoes which serve as symbols of their purpose, for example:

 SEMPER FIDELIS “always faithful” (U.S. Marine Corps)

 LABOR OMNIA VINCIT “Work conquers everything.” (Oklahoma)

 VOX CLAMANTIS IN DESERTO “the voice of one crying in the wilderness” (Dartmouth College)

 A MARI USQUE AD MARE “from sea to sea” (national motto of Canada)

 GRANDESCUNT AUCTA LABORE “By work, all things increase and grow.” (McGill University)

 Exercise 4

 Find further examples of mottoes in English, Latin, or other languages used by any of the following:

 a. your home state or city

 b. military units, such as the army, navy, or air force

 c. local colleges, universities, or academies

 d. local organizations: community service groups, political groups, unions, or clubs.

 Who Is to Blame?

 ,y \

 ;U ** t i

 vV 1

 YV

 A/Y\

 Ubi descendit raeda in fossam, concidunt omnes. Nemo tamen e raeda cadit. Mox cuncti in viam e raeda descendunt, solliciti sed incolumes. Cornelius, quamquam gaudet quod omnes sunt incolumes, raedarium miserum reprehendit.

 “Age, Syre! Noli cessare! Extrahe statim raedam e fossa!" 5

 Syrus igitur equos incitat. Equi raedam strenue trahunt, sed frustra. Raeda in fossa haeret immobilis. Syrus eam movere non potest.

 “O sceleste!" inquit Cornelius. “Tua culpa raeda est in fossa. Quid tu faciebas ubi cisium appropinquabat? Dormiebasne?"

 Interpellat Sextus, “Syrus non dormiebat, sed per viam placide ibat dum 10 appropinquabat cisium. Ego et Marcus spectabamus cisium quod celerrime appropinquabat. Deinde tabellarius equos ad raedam nostram devertebat. Periculum erat magnum. Syrus cisium vitare poterat et iam nos omnes sumus incolumes quod Syrus raedam magna arte agebat."

 Tum Cornelius rogat, “Tune cisium spectabas, Marce, ubi appropin- 15 quabat?"

 “Ita vero, pater!" respondet Marcus. “Omnia observabam. Erat culpa tabellarii, non Syri. Syrus raedam magna arte agebat."

 Sed Cornelius, magna Ira commotus, virgam arripit et raedarium miserum verberat. 20

 concido, concidere (3), to fall down cuncti, all

 incolumis, unhurt, safe and sound gaudeo, gaudere (2), to be glad , cesso, cessare ( 1 ), to be idle, do nothing

 extraho, extrahere (3), to drag out frustra, in vain haereo, haerere (2), to stick t "imoveo, movere (2), to move culpa, -ae (/*), fault, blame cisium, light two-wheeled carriage

 interpello, interpellare (1), to interrupt

 placide, gently, peacefully quod, which celerrime, very fast noster, our

 devertebat, he began to turn aside periculum, danger ars, artis (f), skill ^ ago, agere (3), to drive commotus, moved

 74

 Exercise 14a

 Responde Latine:

 1. Quid accidit ubi descendit raeda in fossam? accidit, happens

 2. Quo cuncti descendunt?

 3. Cur Cornelius gaudet?

 4. Potestne Syrus raedam e fossa extrahere?

 5. Dormiebatne Syrus ubi cisium appropinquabat?

 6. Cuius culpa erat? Cuius . . . ? Whose . . . ?

 7. Quomodo Syrus raedam agebat? Quomodo . . . ? In what way . . . ?

 How . . . ?

 8. Quomodo commotus est Cornelius?

 9. Quid facit Cornelius Iratus?

 VERBS: The Imperfect Tense

 You have now met all the endings of the imperfect tense: *

 Note that the vowel is short before final -m, -t, and -nt.

 These are the endings of the imperfect tense of all Latin verbs (except esse and its compounds, of which posse is one; see page 101).

 The Imperfect Tense

 Be sure to learn these forms thoroughly.

 Note that the personal endings are the same as those given for the present tense on page 41, except that in this tense the first person singular ends in -m (compare sum).

 is a summary of the meanings of the imperfect tense:

 The following

 Syrus non dormiebat. Cornelia dormire volebat. Marcus Corneliam vexabat. Davus in Britannia habitabat. Equos ad raedam nostram devertebat.

 Syrus was not sleeping.

 Cornelia wanted to sleep. Marcus kept annoying Cornelia. Davus used to live in Britain. He began to turn the horses in the direction of our coach.

 Exercise 14b

 Read aloud and trar r

 5-l-erva

 1. Tabellarium liberi spectabant.

 2. Cornelius, ubi epistulas scribebat, uxorem et liberos videre nolebat.

 3. Gaudebat Cornelius quod omnes e raeda incolumes descendebant.

 4. Princeps tabellarios ex urbe saepe mittebat.

 5. Syrus tabellarium vitare poterat quod equos tenebat.

 6. Dormiebasne, Syre? Minime vero, domine! Ego placide per viam ibam.

 7. Quid vos faciebatis, pueri? Nos omnes raedas spectabamus, pater.

 8. Appropinquabatne cisium placide? Minime! Celerrime per viam ibat.

 9. Cur me semper vexabas, Marce? Dormire volebam.

 Exercise 14c

 Select , read aloud y and translate:

 1. Tabellarius equos ferociter 

 incitabam / incitabat / incitabant

 2. Pater et mater e raeda 

 descendebas / descendebat / descendebant

 3. Cur tu celeriter iter ?

 faciebas / faciebant / faciebamus

 4. Nos omnes in raeda 

 dormiebam / dormiebatis / dormiebamus

 5. Ego et Marcus saepe in agris 

 currebamus / currebant / currebat

 Exercise 14d

 Supply the imperfect tense endings y read aloud , and translate:

 1. Tabellarius multas epistulas ab urbe porta 

 2. Cornelia, quae defessa era , in cubiculo dormie 

 3. Nos omnes raedam magna arte age 

 4. Sub arboribus vinearum et in olivetis vos Getam pete 

 5. Latra canes; per agros curre ; Getam invenire non

 potera 

 6. “Dave, servumne baculo verbera ?”

 7. Alii servi in villa, alii in vineis labora 

 8. Sextus identidem clama , “Ecce! auriga!”

 olivetis, olive groves

 77

 Vehicle Spotting

 I

 Dum raeda in fossa manebat, Marcus et Sextus vehicula exspectabant. Longum erat silentium.

 Diu nullum vehiculum apparet. Tandem Marcus murmur rotarum audit et procul vim pulveris conspicit.

 Sextus, “Quid est, Marce? Estne plaustrum?” 5

 Marcus, “Minime, fatue! Plaustra onera magna ferunt. Tarda igitur sunt.

 Sed illud vehiculum celeriter appropinquat.”

 Sextus, “Ita vero! Praeterea equi illud vehicillum trahunt. Boves plaustra trahunt. Fortasse est raeda.”

 “Non est raeda,” inquit Marcus, “Nam quattuor rotas habet raeda. Illud 10 vehiculum duas tantum rotas habet.”

 “Est cisium!” clamat Sextus. “Ecce, Marce!/quam celeriter appropinquat! Fortasse est alius tabellarius.”

 “Minime, Sexte!” respondet Marcus. “Nfen est tabellarius. Tabellarii tunicas gerere solent. Ille togam gerit. Fortasse est vir praeclarus qui ab urbe 15 Neapolim iter facit.”

 Praeterit cisium. Tum vim pulveris tantum vident et murmur rotarum audiunt. Tandem silentium.

 exspecto, exspectare (1), to look out for

 longus, -a, -um, long diu, for a long time appareo, apparere (2), to appear rota, -ae if ), wheel procul, in the distance, far off vim pulveris, a cloud of dust plaustrum, -I (n), wagon, cart onus, oneris (n), load, burden

 tardus, -a, -um, slow ille, illa, illud, that, he, she, it praeterea, besides bos, bovis {m/f ), ox tantum, only fortasse, perhaps alius, alia, aliud, another Neapolim, to Naples praetereo, praeterire ( irreg .), to go past

 78

 Numerals and Numbers

 T* 1 V »0

 ol

 '

 -VIII

 Lix

 Ul

 _c

 -D

 U M

 O iynckcrr>^

 X* I - dvodjic ivv>

 octo, eight novem, nine - ^ep^nd^CAVVi

 decem, ten quinquaginta, fifty centum, a hundred quingenti, -ae, -a, five hundred mllle, a thousand

 Full sets of the forms of unus, duo, and tres are given on page 99.

 (2 _ "2 0 )

 79

 •K

 Exercise 15a

 Complete these sentences with the Latin words for the appropriate numbers , read aloud, and translate:

 1. Quot rotas habet raeda? rotas habet raeda.

 2. Quot rotas habet cisium? rotas habet cisium.

 3. Quot liberi in raeda erant? liberi in raeda erant.

 4. Duo et sunt decem.

 5. Duo et tres sunt 

 6. Sex et sunt novem.

 7. Quinque et tres sunt 

 8. Quattuor et sex sunt 

 9. Quattuor et quinque sunt 

 10. Quattuor et sunt septem.

 Quot . . . ? How many . . . ?

 Neuter Nouns

 Some nouns in Latin have the same ending in the accusative as in the nominative. They have -a as the ending in the nominative and accusative plural. These are neuter nouns.

 You have met sentences like:

 Davus baculum habet. Davus has a stick.

 Vestigia Getae inveniunt. They find Getas tracks.

 The words baculum and vestigia are neuter nouns. The 2nd and 3rd declensions have neuter nouns.

 There are three genders of Latin nouns: masculine, feminine, and neuter. Most nouns of the 1st declension are feminine (e.g., puella). The 2nd declension contains both masculine nouns (such as those in the chart on page 59) and neuter nouns as in the chart on page 80. The 3rd declension contains nouns of all three genders (e.g., pater and vox in the chart on page 59, which are masculine and feminine respectively, and nomen in the chart on page 80, which is neuter).

 All of this is brought together in the chart on page 97 at the end of this book, which shows the forms of nouns of all three genders in the three declensions.

 Other examples of neuter nouns are:

 Exercise 15b

 Read aloud and translate:

 1. Nullum vehiculum pueri conspicere poterant.

 2. Nox erat; raeda in fossa immobilis manebat; nemo auxilium ferebat.

 3. Marcus et Sextus spectabant vehiculum quod celerrime appropinquabat.

 4. Canis latrabat quod murmur rotarum audiebat.

 5. Majcus baculum iaciebat; canis baculum petebat.

 6. Plaustra onera magna ferebant.

 7. Erant multa vehicula in via; cisium tarda vehicula praeteribat.

 8. “Quot vehicula videre potes, Marce?" rogat Sextus. “Unum cisium et tria plaustra procul video.”

 9. Vestigia vehiculorum videre poteramus, nam via erat madida.

 10. Quot liberos in raeda vides? In raeda unam puellam et duos pueros video.

 11. Quot liberi Romam raeda iter faciebant? Una puella et duo pueri cum parentibus Romam ibant.

 12. Raedarius baculo equos incitat; equi celerrime currunt.

 13. Nescimus nomina omnium servorum; sed Davus cunctos servos nomine saepe convocabat.

 14. Quamquam tabellarii multa itinera faciebant, pericula magna in viis identidem vitabant.

 Word Study IV

 Numbers

 The Latin words for numbers provide English with a great many words. For example, the English word unite (to bring together as one) comes from the Latin number unus. The English word duet (music for two performers) is derived from duo in Latin, and triple (three fold) traces its ancestry to the Latin tres.

 Exercise 1

 Match these English words with their meanings.

 1. sextet a.

 2. unique b.

 3. decimate c.

 (C, 4. quadrant d.

 5. duplex e.

 6. septuagenarians f.

 7. octagon g.

 & 8. triad h.

 9. quintuplets i.

 10. century j.

 five babies born together an eight-sided figure one-of-a-kind, without equal people in their seventies to destroy one tenth of a set of three one fourth of a circle a period of 100 years a group of six a two-family house or an apartment on two levels

 The Roman Number System

 The origin of Roman numerals from one to ten is in the human hand. The Roman numeral I is one finger held up; the numeral II is two fingers, and so on. The numeral V comes from the v-shape between the thumb and the other four fingers pressed together, and it therefore represents five. When two V’s are placed with their points touching, the numeral X is formed, representing ten.

 The number system of the Romans was awkward compared to the Arabic system we use today. As Roman numerals grew larger, they became increasingly hard to read. Since the Romans had no zero, arithmetic calculation was difficult. Although no longer used in mathematics, Roman numerals

 are still part of our everyday experience: on the face of a clock, in the chapter headings of our books, and in writing the year of an important date.

 Here are some rules to remember about Roman numerals:

 1. A numeral followed by a smaller numeral represents addition: VI = 5 + 1 = 6 .

 2. A numeral followed by a larger numeral represents subtraction: IV = 5 - 1 = 4.

 3. A smaller numeral between two larger numerals is subtracted from the second of the larger numerals: MCM = 1000 + (1000 — 100) = 1900.

 Exercise 2

 Give the following in Arabic numerals:

 1. XXI 21

 2. DC <"

 3. XL ^

 4. LVn 5

 5. XIX

 6. XXXIV 3 M

 7. LXXXVIII

 8. MDLXXIII | 5 7 '

 9. MCMXLVI <o 10. MDCCCLXIV i -i<o <4

 Exercise 3

 Give the following in Roman numerals:

 1. your age X J V

 2. the year of our story, a.d. 80 /.X^X

 3. the current year (V) V

 4. the year Rome was founded, 753 B.c. ^

 5. your age in 25 years time yy^y i X

 Exercise 4

 Find ten examples of Roman numerals in use in your environment.

 I - ope

 V - Fivf X- 4 eh

 0- _ o

 p c £ive

 XI 5 0\a<( J-Vio^qndi

 y Co, 1^1 }Q

 If /vi/jMC M L. XX\ X \j\u/yxvfii/ivlPccCLyxx v ID

 (K\)) ; \00O,0O<;

 t-jl

 Do We Stay at an Inn?

 Erat decima hora. Raeda adhuc in fossa manebat quod raedarius eam movere non poterat. Aurelia sollicita erat; Cornelia lacrimabat; etiam pueri pericula iam timebant; Cornelius in via stabat sollicitus et caelum spectabat quod iam advesperascebat.

 Tandem Eucleides, “Videsne illud aedificium, domine?” inquit. 5

 “Video,” Cornelius respondet. “Quid est?”

 “Caupona est. Vlsne igitur ibi pernoctare, domine?”

 Clamat Aurelia, “O me miseram! Cauponas non amo. Saepe ibi pericula sunt magna. Fortasse caupo alios equos habet. Fortasse equi cauponis raedam e fossa extrahere possunt. In caupona pernoctare timeo.” 10

 “Cur times, mea domina?” Eucleides rogat. “Nullum est periculum. Omnes cauponae non sunt periculosae. Omnes caupones non sunt scelesti.

 Ille caupo est amicus meus. Graecus est et vir bonus.”

 Tum Aurelia, “Cornelius est senator Romanus. Senatores Romani in caupona non pernoctant.” 15

 Cornelius tamen, “Quid facere possumus?” inquit. “Hic in Via Appia pernoctare non possumus. Nulla vehicula iam apparent quod advesperascit.

 Est nullum auxilium. Illa caupona non procul abest. Necesse est igitur ad cauponam Ire. Agite, pueri!”

 Itaque, dum Eucleides Cornelios ad cauponam ducebat, raedarius solus 20 in via manebat; raedam et equos custodiebat.

 decimus, -a, -urn, tenth caelum, -I (n), sky advesperascere (3), to get dark aedificium, -I (n), building caupona, -ae if ), inn Vlsne . . . ? Do you want . . . ? pernocto, pernoctare (1), to spend the night

 i'

 7 J ‘ I

 caupo, cauponis (m), innkeeper/ v

 periculosus, -a, -um, dangerous

 Graecus, -a, -um, Greek

 eo, Ire ( irreg .), to go

 itaque, and so, therefore

 custodio, custodire (4), to guard

 ( Pv_C v \ V^lCXA/'t/ *r

 84

 Exercise 16 a

 Responde Latine:

 1. Cur raeda in fossa manebat?

 2. Cur Cornelius sollicitus erat?

 3. Quid videt Eucleides?

 4. Ubi pernoctare possunt?

 5. Cur Aurelia in caupona pernoctare non vult?

 6. Qualis vir est caupo?

 7. Ubi Cornelii pernoctare non possunt?

 8. Quo Ire necesse est?

 9. Quis ad raedam et equos manebat?

 1. Caupones cives Romani non amant, nam saepe scelesti caupones cives in caupona verberant.

 2. Puellarum nomina ancilla nova vocat; sed strenuae puellae vocem ancillae non audiunt.

 3. Periculosum erat iter per Viam Appiam facere, nam servi fugitivi sub arboribus se celabant et, ubi advesperascebat, viatores baculo verberabant.

 4. Alii servi equos domini in viam ducebant, alii e villa currebant et cistas in raeda ponebant.

 5. Ubi Cornelius epistulas scribit, nemo eum impedit. Si magnae liberorum voces patrem vexant, Aurelia pueros in hortum mittit.

 6. Plaustrum duas habet rotas; in plaustris onera magna rustici ponunt; plaustra boves per vias in urbem nocte trahunt.

 7. Aurelia in caupona pernoctare nolebat; caupones timebat. “Caupones," inquit, “scelesti sunt omnes et cauponae periculosae."

 8. Non omnes caupones scelesti sunt. Eucleidis amicus est caupo bonus, et viatores in caupona eius salvi sunt.

 9. Bacula canis petere parat. Marcus baculum longum iacit, sed baculum canis petere non potest quod in arboris ramis haeret.

 10. Magnum numerum servorum Cornelius in vinea spectabat. Servi spectabant Getam, qui in ramo arboris dormiebat.

 Versiculi: "Proserpina," pages 92-93 "Phaethon," pages 94-95.

 85

 Exercise 16b

 Read aloud and translate:

 Review III

 Exercise Ilia

 Read and translate each sentence below with the appropriate form of each of the following verbs in the imperfect tense:

 exspecto, exspectare conspicio, conspicere extraho, extrahere

 moveo, movere custodio, custodire

 1. Ego raedam 4. Nos raedam 

 2. Tu raedam 5. Vos raedam 

 3. Servus raedam 6. Servi raedam 

 Exercise Illb

 Change the words in italics to plural , make any other necessary changes, read aloud , and translate:

 1. Pueri in cubiculo dormiebant.

 2. Servus onus magnum portat.

 3. Sextus murmur rotarum in via audiebat.

 4. Cornelii in cisio iter faciebant.

 5. Periculum in viis est magnum.

 6. Cornelius servos baculo verberabat.

 7. Senator ad urbem iter facit.

 8. Raeda est vehiculum Romanum.

 9. Rusticus in plaustro dormit.

 10. Rota cisii Infirma erat.

 Exercise IIIc

 Complete the sentences with Latin words for the appropriate numbers, read aloud, and translate:

 1. Quot filios habet Cornelius? Cornelius filium habet.

 2. Quot filias habet Cornelius? Cornelius filiam habet.

 3. Numerus liberorum Cornelii est 

 4. Quot pedes habet lupus? Lupus pedes habet.

 5. Quot liberi ad urbem iter faciunt? liberi ad urbem iter faciunt.

 6. Quot rotas habent raeda et cisium? Raeda et cisium rotas

 habent.

 7. Quot pedes habent duo lupi? Duo lupi habent pedes.

 8. Quot nomina habet Cornelius? Cornelius nomina habet.

 9. Quot nomina habet Cornelia? Cornelia nomen habet.

 10. Quot pedes habent tres pueri? Tres pueri pedes habent.

 Exercise Hid

 Select the correct word , read the sentence aloud , and translate it into English:

 1. In agris errabant 

 2. Aurelia cibum parare

 iubebat.

 3. Cornelius multos habebat.

 4. Quid facit ?

 5. Sextus neque puellas neque 

 timet.

 6. Rustici baculis excitant.

 7. Quam molesta est !

 8. Sub arborum ramis dormit 

 9. Procul arbores, , vineas vident.

 10. Canes latrantes timebant 

 11. In agris sunt multae arbores.

 12. In area Marcus videt magnum numerum

 13. Ancillae liberorum curabant.

 14. Servi cum per vineas

 festinabant.

 15. novas induere vult.

 16. Marcus multos servos in agris 

 videt.

 17. Pueri in effugiebant.

 18. Pater pueros in hortum 

 19. Rustici sub ramis arborum 

 20. Cornelius arbores non iam

 potest.

 21. Tabellarius multas epistulas 

 22. Servi Getam in arbore 

 pueros / pueri / puerorum ancillae / ancillas / servi / Davus

 canes / servum / ancillas / amici

 Aureliam / Aurelia / Aureliae

 fossae / vllicus / Davum / ancilla

 canis / boves / equus

 Sextus / puellae / Flavia / Corneliam

 cives / servus / rusticos agri / villae / vlltes pueros / pueri / puella Cornelii / villa / vineam

 ancillae / servorum / virum /puellas tunica / tunicae / canis / cistas

 canes / amicos / canibus / agris

 puella / puellae / stola / stolas

 omnis / patris / Cornelio / patribus

 horto / hortum / hortis / hortorum

 mittunt / est / mittit / reprehendit dormiebat / laborabat / sedebat / laborabant ascendit / ascendebat / ascendere ferebant / ferebat / scribebant / habebant invenit/ mittit / inveniunt / reprehendit

 Read the following passage and answer the questions in Latin:

 Raeda in fossa haerebat immobilis. Raedarius solus manebat quod necesse erat raedam et equos custodire. “O me miserum!” inquit. “Dominus meus est Iratus quod raedam e fossa movere non possum. Hic pernoctare nolo. Esurio etiam, sed cibum non habeo.”

 Iam advesperascebat. Nulla vehicula praeteribant. Nemo per viam ad urbem ibat. Equi sub arboribus quiescebant. Dormiebat in raeda raedarius. Longum erat silentium.

 Subito appropinquant tres latrones qui ab urbe per Viam Appiam iter faciunt. Cistas in via conspiciunt et statim petunt. Vestes extrahunt. Ad urbem redire parant. Subito stertit raedarius. Latrones, qui raedarium non vident, aufugiunt perterriti. Vestes in via relinquunt.

 Iam dies est. Raedarius surgit. Tunicas et stolas et togas spectat. “Cur vestes in via sunt? Quis hoc faciebat ubi ego dormiebam?” Hoc mussabat et vestes in cistis ponebat. Tum cistas in raedam iacit, raedam ipse ascendit, auxilium exspectat.

 esurio, esurire (4), to be hungry latro, latronis (m), robber vestes, vestium (f pl ), clothes sterto, stertere (3), to snore aufugid, aufugere (3), to run away relinquo, relinquere (3), to leave

 io

 15

 1. Why did the coachman remain alone?

 2. Why is he unhappy?

 3. Why is he hungry? - (OVc 1

 4. Why were there no more vehicles passing by?

 5. What were the horses doing under the trees?

 6. In what direction are the thieves going?

 7. What do they do after they take the clothes out of the trunks?

 8. Why are the thieves startled when they hear the coachman snore?

 9. What does the coachman see the next morning?

 10. What does he do?

 11. What does he wait for?

 cj —^

 Exercise Illf

 In the first five lines above identify the subjects and the direct objects , and identify the tense of each verb.

 88

 VERSICULI

 1 Serves Him Right

 (after Chapter 4)

 Arbor habet felem. Sextus petit (ecce!) superbus. Ad terram feles desilit, ille manet.

 habet, (he, she, it) has feles, (a, the) cat petit, (he, she) seeks, goes after superbus, boastful ad terram, to the ground desilit, (he, she) jumps down ille, he

 manet, (he, she) stays

 2 Show-off!

 (after Chapter 7)

 Ambulat in muro Sextus spectantque puellae. “Non timeo muros!” clamat, humique cadit.

 in muro, on the wall -que, and

 humi, to or on the ground

 89

 3 Time to Go Home

 (after Chapter 8)

 Non laetis, puer, ambulare in agrls aut ascendere in arbores licebit,

 Latracemve tuum videre amicum.

 Cras urbem petere et forum necesse est.

 non . . . licebit, it will not be permitted (to you), you will not be able aut, or

 Latrax, name of a dog (cf. latrat, barks)

 -ve, or

 eras, tomorrow forum, market place

 4 Bad News

 (after Chapter 9)

 Non iam errare in agrls, non iam latrante licebit cum cane per totum ludere, Sexte, diem; aut in frondosos, ignave, ascendere ramos arboris, et lentos inde videre boves; aut tua dum clamant mirantes facta puellae, 5 saltare in muro, “Vae tibi, caute parum!”

 non . . . licebit, it will not be permitted (to you), you will not be able latrante . . . cum cane, with a barking dog per totum . . . diem, the whole day through ludere, to play

 aut . . . aut, either ... or (with non, 1 = nor . . . nor) in frondosos . . . ramos arboris, up into leafy branches of a tree lentus, slow-moving inde, from there boves, oxen, cows

 tua . . . mirantes facta, marveling at your exploits saltare, to jump in muro, on the wall

 Vae tibi, caute parum! Serves you right, you reckless boy!

 5 To Rome Tomorrow

 (after Chapter 10)

 Ad Romana iterum fora festinare necesse est, cras iterum plenas plebe videre vias.

 Iam domina Irata est; iam ancilla huc currit et illuc; ducit iam invitos ad iuga servus equos.

 fora, market places plenas plebe, full of people domina, mistress

 huc ... et illuc, hither and thither invitus, unwilling ad iuga, to their harness

 6 Spoken by Geta

 (after Chapter 12)

 O servl, spectate Getam me nomine servum, cui grave vox domini continuusque labor.

 Iam tergo baculi vestigia, iamque figura

 (heu monstrum!) media stat mihi fronte triplex!

 cui grave, to whom . . . were annoying tergo, on my back

 figura . . . triplex, the threefold mark

 heu monstrum, alas the terrible warning

 media . . . mihi fronte, on the middle of my forehead

 7 Disaster

 (after Chapter 13)

 Non defessi urbem petimus laetique videmus multa; sed occurrit vix bene sanus homo Tum devertit equos servus. Cornelia clamat. In fossa raeda est, in tabulisque sumus.

 multa, many things (acc. pl.)

 occurro, occurrere (3), to meet

 vix bene sanus, scarcely in his right mind

 homo, hominis (m), man

 deverto, devertere (3), to turn aside

 tabula, -ae (f ), plank, floorboard

 8 Proserpina

 (after Chapter 16)

 Proserpina was the daughter of Ceres, the goddess of the earth and crops. One day she was picking flowers in the fields of Enna in Sicily, when the ground suddenly opened beneath a very beautiful flower and she was snatched away by Dis, the god of the underworld, who desired her for his wife. Her mother, in terrible distress, searched for her the whole world over, and out of sympathy with the great goddess, the earth bore no fruit or grain. When Ceres at last learned what had happened to her daughter, she begged her back from the king of the dead and was told that Proserpina might return, provided she had eaten nothing during her stay below. Alas, she had eaten four pomegranate seeds and so was destined every year thereafter to spend four months with her husband while her mother mourned and all the face of the earth mourned with her. The poem tells part of this story.

 nam, “Prope non flos est pulcherrimus,” inquit, “amicae.

 Saepe in desertos Ire necesse locos.”

 Sola olim solis in agris defessa puella 5

 (heu!) sedet, et florem multum habet atque bonum, cum prope sub parva magnum videt arbore florem et petit. At florem non superare potest.

 Tum magis atque magis Proserpina parva laborat

 strenua—sed frustra! Flos magis haeret ibi. 10

 Ecce! Puella, cave! Monstrum est! Temeraria, monstrum (esque sine ancillis sola), puella, cave!

 At subito parva est discissa sub arbore terra, apparent atri quattuor intus equi.

 “Ancillae, ferte auxilium!” Proserpina clamat, 15

 “Mater,” et “auxilium fer, dea magna, mihi!

 Dis me habet!” At celat lacrimantem terra puellam.

 Invenit et dominam servula nulla suam.

 terra, -ae (/"), land, earth, ground Siculus, -a, -um, Sicilian flos, floris (m), flower prope, near by

 pulcherrimus, -a, -um, loveliest locus, -I (m), place olim, one day heu, alas

 multus, -a, -um, much, in abundance atque, and

 parvus, -a, -um, small at, but

 supero, superare (1), to overcome, to pull up

 magis, more

 monstrum, -I (n), warning -que, and

 sine (+ abl.), without est discissa, was torn apart, opened up

 ater, atra, atrum, black intus, inside (the opening) dea, -ae (/), goddess Dis, Dltis (m), Dis, the god of the underworld

 servula, -ae (f ), slave-girl

 93

 (after Chapter 16)

 Phaethon was really the Sun-god’s son, but none of his friends would believe him when he boasted about it. In fact, he began to doubt it himself. So one day he journeyed far to the east to the palace of the Sun-god, the stately golden fortress from which every morning he begins his journey through the skies. The god laughed when he heard of his son’s doubts and distress and said, “To prove to you beyond doubt that I am your father, ask anything at all of me and I promise you on my unbreakable word that I will grant it. ” Phaethon asked to be allowed for one day to drive the great sun-chariot with its four huge horses.

 There was nothing the Sun-god was less willing to grant. He looked at Phaethon and at the great horses and knew that the boy would not be able to control them. But he had given his word, and the youth set off to his certain death. The horses got the bit between their teeth and came so near the earth with their blazing chariot that Jupiter, king of gods and men, had no choice but to destroy them with his thunderbolts to save the earth and everyone on it from being destroyed by fire.

 Sumit ab invito genitore elatus habenas et puer immensos incitat acer equos.

 Mox procul a summo timidus videt aethere terras, tum dextra sociis (en!) equus hinnit equis.

 Et, “Socii, non est onus hoc solitum,” inquit. “Habenas 5 quae tenet has hodie, nonne remissa manus?

 Est auriga puer! Puer horum at nullus equorum est dominus. Retinet non mea colla puer!

 Noster abest dominus. Nunc ludere tempus, amici,

 nunc devertere iter. Quo placet Ire licet.” 10

 Currus deinde patris vestigia certa relinquit.

 Descendit, Phaethon nec retinere potest.

 Incipit et iam vicinos nimis urere montes; vicinos currus iam nimis urit agros.

 Mox urbes nullae incolumes; mox oppida nulla, 15

 nulla propinquantes non timet aula rotas.

 Iuppiter illa videt; qui, “Non placet,” inquit, “equorum si terras omnes urere turba potest.

 O Cyclopes, ubi sunt fulmina?” Fulmina mittit.

 Servat sic terras. Heu! Phaethonta necat. 20

 94

 sumo, sumere (3), to take invitus, -a, -um, unwilling genitor, genitoris (m), father elatus, -a, -um, delighted habenae, -arum (f pi ), reins acer, acris, acre, eager a summo . . . aethere, from the heights of heaven terra, -ae if), land dextra, on the right sociis . . . equls, to the horses accompanying (him) en, look, behold hinnid, hinnire (4), to whinny socius, -I (m), companion hoc, this

 solitus, -a, -um, usual has, these

 nonne remissa manus? is it not a feeble hand? horum, of these at, but

 retineo, retinere (2), to hold back, restrain colla, -orum (n pi ), neck ludo, ludere (3), to play

 quo placet Ire licet, we may go where we please currus, chariot certus, -a, -um, fixed, usual relinquo, relinquere (3), to leave nec, and not

 incipio, incipere (3), to begin nimis, too, too much uro, urere (3), to burn mons, montis (m), mountain oppidum, -I (n), town propinquantes, approaching aula, -ae (f ), hall, palace Iuppiter, lovis (m), Jupiter ilia, those things, that non placet, I don’t like it turba, -ae (f ), crowd Cyclopes, Cyclopum (m pi ), Cyclopes (giants who manufactured thunderbolts for Jupiter) fulmen, fulminis (n), thunderbolt servo, servare (1), to save sic, in this way Heu! Alas!

 Phaethonta, Phaethon (acc. case ) need, necare (1), to kill

 PRONUNCIATION

 The pronunciation of Latin is best learned by imitation of the teacher.

 Most consonants are pronounced as in English, but the following should be noted:

 b before s or t is pronounced as English p: urbs.

 c is always hard and pronounced as English k : cibus.

 g is hard, as in English “get”: gemit.

 gn in the middle of a word may be pronounced as the ngn in English “hangnail”: magnus.

 i before a vowel is a consonant and pronounced as English y: ianua.

 r should be rolled: ramus.

 s is pronounced as in English “sing,” never as in “roses”: clvis.

 v is pronounced as English w: villa.

 The following approximations are offered for the pronunciation of short and long vowels. In addition, long vowels should be held for a longer time than short ones.

 SHORT

 a = English “alike” (pater) e = English “pet” (ego) i = English “sip” (iterum) o = English “for” (omnes) u = English “foot” (ubi)

 LONG

 a = English “father” (mater) e = English “date” (descendo) I = English “sleep” (Iratus)

 6 = English “holy” (in horto) u = English “boot” (unus)

 The diphthong ae is pronounced as the y in English “sky” (amicae). The diphthong au is pronounced as the ow in English “how” (audit). The diphthong ei is pronounced as the “ay” in English “say” (deinde).

 Latin words are accented according to simple rules. If the next to the last syllable has a long vowel or a diphthong, it will receive the accent:

 discido

 If the next to the last syllable has a short vowel followed by two consonants, it will usually receive the accent:

 extendo

 Otherwise, the accent falls on the third syllable from the end:

 Britannicus

 Careful observation of the long marks (macrons) over the vowels will thus help with both pronunciation and accenting of Latin words.

 FORMS

 The following charts show the forms of typical Latin nouns, adjectives, and verbs in the cases and tenses presented in this book. As an aid in pronunciation, markings of long vowels and of accents are included.

 I. Nouns

 II. Adjectives

 III. Numbers

 The Present Tense

 IV. Regular Verbs

 The Present Tense

 V. Irregular Verbs

 101

 Note: The imperatives of nolle are noli (sing.) and nolite (pi).

 Vocabulary *

 from

 to go away

 to be away, absent

 to happen

 to, towards, at, near still

 to reach, arrive at to get dark building in summer Come on! field

 to do, drive

 another, other

 some . . . others . . .

 the other, a second

 to walk

 friend

 friend

 to like, love slave-woman to appear to approach tree

 open space, threshing-floor to grab hold of, snatch skill

 to climb, go up, climb into (a carriage)

 to hear, listen to

 charioteer

 help

 stick good ox, cow

 in a short time, soon

 Britain

 British

 ^Numbers at the left refer to the chapter in which the word first appears.

 16

 6

 12

 1

 16

 16

 4

 8

 14

 11

 15

 14

 11

 14

 10

 13

 3

 5

 14

 9

 14

 4

 7

 12

 10

 8

 14

 14

 12

 14

 1

 10

 2

 16

 15

 16

 2

 8

 4

 14

 6

 103

 12

 3

 15

 11

 8

 8

 9

 3

 15

 7

 9

 6

 9

 3

 9

 12

 6

 1

 1

 2

 8

 8

 14

 15

 11

 9

 11

 11

 7

 14

 5

 15

 12

 14

 8

 15

 10

 11

 6

 13

 moveo, movere (2) mox

 multi, -ae, -a murmur, murmuris (n) musso, mussire (1)

 nam

 narrator, narratoris (m) nato, natare (1)

 -ne

 Neapolis

 necesse

 nemo

 neque . . . neque . . .

 nescio, nescire (4)

 nihil

 nobis

 nocte

 nolo, nolle ( irreg .) nomen, nominis (n) nomine non

 nondum

 nos

 noster, nostra, nostrum novem

 nox, noctis (f) nullus, -a, -um numerus, -i (m) nunc

 nuntius, -i (m)

 observo, observare (1) occupatus, -a, -um octo

 olfacio, olfacere (3) olivetum, -i (n) omnes, omnia onus, oneris (n)

 paratus, -a, -um parens, parentis ( m/f) paro, parare (1) pars, partis (f)

 to move soon, presently many

 murmur, rumble to mutter

 for

 narrator to swim

 (indicates a question)

 Naples

 necessary

 no one

 neither . . . nor . . . to be ignorant, not know nothing for us at night

 to be unwilling, not wish name

 by name, called not

 not yet

 we, us

 our

 nine

 night

 no

 number

 now

 messenger

 to watch

 busy

 eight

 to catch the scent of, smell olive grove

 all, everyone, everything load, burden

 ready, prepared parent

 to prepare, get ready part

 107

 9

 16

 14

 16

 6

 13

 5

 1

 3

 14

 15

 11

 10

 11

 10

 6

 13

 13

 15

 15

 10

 7

 15

 9

 6

 1

 3

 1

 4

 13

 11

 15

 6

 1

 10

 1

 13

 15

 15

 15

 1

 4

 pater, patris (m) per (4- acc. ) periculosus, -a, -um periculum, -I (n) pernocto, pernoctare (1) perterritus, -a, -um pes, pedis (m) peto, petere (3) pictura, -ae if) piscina, -ae if) placide

 plaustrum, -I (n) plenus, -a, -um pono, ponere (3) porta, -ae if) porto, portare (1) possum, posse ( irreg.) poterat

 praeclarus, -a, -um praeterea

 praetereo, praeterire {irreg.) praetexta (toga) princeps, principis (m) procul

 promitto, promittere (3) prope (4- acc. ) puella, -ae (f ) puer, pueri ( m )

 quae

 Qualis . . . ?

 Quam . . . !

 quamquam

 quattuor

 Quem . . . ?

 qui, quae, quod

 quidam, quaedam, quoddam

 Quid facit . . . ?

 quiesco, quiescere (3)

 quingenti, -ae, -a

 quinquaginta

 quinque

 Quis . . . ? Quid . . . ?

 Quo . . . ?

 father

 through, along

 dangerous

 danger

 to spend the night frightened, terrified foot

 to look for, seek, aim at, attack

 picture

 fishpond

 gently, peacefully wagon, cart full

 to put, place

 gate

 to carry

 to be able

 (he, she) was able

 distinguished, famous

 besides, too, moreover

 to go past

 with purple edge

 emperor

 in the distance, far off

 to promise

 near

 girl

 boy

 who

 What sort of ... ?

 How . . . !

 although

 four

 Whom . . . ? who, which a certain

 What does . . . do? to rest, keep quiet five hundred fifty five

 Who . . . ? What . . . ?

 Where ... to?

 108

 13

 14

 2

 7

 15

 10

 10

 4

 5

 6

 12

 5

 7

 3

 13

 6

 12

 7

 1

 15

 1

 13

 2

 7

 7

 3

 10

 7

 11

 9

 2

 1

 9

 4

 7

 15

 13

 3

 15

 quod

 Quo Instrumento . . . ?

 Quomodo . . . ? quoque Quos . . . ?

 Quot . . . ?

 raeda, -ae (/") raedarius, -I (m) ramus, -I (m) redeo, redire ( irreg.) repello, repellere (3) reprehendo, reprehendere (3) respondeo, respondere (2) revoco, revocare (1) rideo, ridere (2)

 (magno) risu rivus, -I (m) rogo, rogare (1)

 Roma, -ae if)

 Romanus, -a, -um rota, -ae (f) rusticus, -a, -um rusticus, -I (m)

 saepe

 saluto, salutare (1)

 Salve! Salvate! salvus, -a, -um scelestus, -a, -um scribo, scribere (3) se

 secundus, -a, -um sed

 sedeo, sed6re (2) semisomnus, -a, -um semper

 senator, senatoris (m) septem

 septimus, -a, -um servus, -I (m) sex

 because, which

 With what implement . . . ?

 How . . . ?

 In what way . . . ? How . . . ? also

 Whom . . . ?

 How many . . . ?

 traveling carriage, coach

 coachman

 branch

 to return

 to drive off, drive back to blame, scold to reply

 to recall, call back

 to laugh, smile

 with a loud laugh

 stream

 to ask

 Rome

 Roman

 wheel

 rustic, country-style peasant

 often

 to greet, welcome

 Greetings! Good morning! Hello!

 undamaged, all right, safe

 wicked

 to write

 himself, herself, itself, themselves

 second

 but

 to sit

 half-asleep

 always

 senator

 seven

 seventh

 slave

 six

 109

 15

 6

 9

 10

 3

 3

 11

 3

 5

 3

 10

 10

 8

 2

 1

 3

 1

 8

 9

 13

 9

 9

 12

 2

 15

 15

 6

 9

 2

 9

 4

 6

 5

 10

 7

 12

 12

 4

 4

 8

 5

 110

 1

 15

 7

 11

 9

 13

 5

 11

 12

 3

 10

 16

 1

 4

 11

 1

 1

 12

 3

 13

 16

 15

 13

 6

 8

 4

 6

 Ubi . . . ? ubi

 unus, -a, -um urbs, urbis (f) uxor, uxoris (f)

 Vale! Val6te! vehiculum, -I (n) velle ( see volo) venio, venire (4) verbero, verberare (1) vestigium, -i (n) vexo, vexare (1) via, -ae (f) viator, viatoris ( m) vicinus, -a, -um video, videre (2) vllicus, -I (m) villa, -ae (f) villa rustica vinea, -ae (f) vir, viri (m) virga, -ae (f) vis (from volo) vis pulveris vito, vitire (1) volo, velle ( irreg .) vos

 vox, vocis (f) vult (from volo)

 Where . . . ?

 where, when

 one

 city

 wife

 Goodbye!

 vehicle

 to come to beat

 track, footprint, trace to annoy road, street traveler neighboring to see

 overseer, farm manager

 farmhouse

 farmhouse

 vineyard

 man

 stick

 you want cloud of dust to avoid

 to wish, want, be willing

 you (pi)

 voice

 (he, she) wishes, wants

 111

 Ecce Romani

 A Latin Reading Program Revised Edition

 2

 Rome at Last

 Longman «■

 Ecce Romani Student’s Book 2 Rome at Last

 Copyright © 1984 by Longman. All rights reserved. No part of this book or related recordings may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without prior permission from the publisher.

 First Printing 1984

 ISBN 0 582 36665 8 (72459)

 Illustrated by Peter Dennis, Trevor Parkin, Hamish Gordon and Claudia Karabaic Sargent. Cover illustration by Peter Dennis.

 This edition of Ecce Romani is based on Ecce Romani: A Latin Reading Course , originally prepared by The Scottish Classics Group © copyright The Scottish Classics Group 1971, 1982, and published in the United Kingdom by Oliver and Boyd, a Division of Longman Group. This edition has been prepared by a team of American and Canadian educators:

 Authors: Professor Gilbert Lawall, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts

 David Tafe, Rye Country Day School, Rye, New York Consultants: Dr. Rudolph Masciantonio, Philadelphia Public Schools, Pennsylvania Ronald Palma, Holland Hall School, Tulsa, Oklahoma Dr. Edward Barnes, C.W. Jefferys Secondary School, Downsview, Ontario

 Shirley Lowe, Wayland Public Schools, Way land, Massachusetts

 For providing us with photographs or permission to publish extracts from their publications, we would like to thank:

 Page 62: The Montreal Museum of Fine Arts, photograph of Roman Magistrates and Lictors by Jean Lemaire, French 1598-1659, oil on canvas. A gift of Lord Strathcona and family.

 Page 58: Harvard University Press, publisher of Loeb Classical Library, Pliny Natural History, Volume X Book XXXVI-XXXVII, copyright © 1962 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College.

 Pages 21, 47, and 91: Carol Clemeau Esler, Roman Voices: Everyday Latin in Ancient Rome and Teacher’s Guide to Roman Voices: Everyday Latin in Ancient Rome , published by Gilbert Lawall, 71 Sand Hill Road, Amherst, MA 01002.

 Longman

 95 Church Street

 White Plains, New York 10601

 Distributed in Canada by Academic Press Ltd., 55 Barber Greene Road, Don Mills, Ontario MC3 2A1, Canada.

 GHIJ-MU-959493929190

 CONTENTS

 17 Arrival at the Inn 5

 Word Study V 12

 18 Settling In 16

 Graffiti from Ancient Inns 21 Horace’s Journey 22 Travel by Land 25

 19 Chance Encounter 27

 Roman Hospitality 30

 20 Murder 32

 Review IV 36 Eavesdropping 39

 21 From the Inn to Rome 41

 Sepulchral Inscriptions 47 Word Study VI 48

 22 At the Porta Capena 50

 Aqueducts 56

 23 Always Tomorrow 60

 Review V 65

 24 First Morning in Rome 68

 Selections from Catullus and Horace 71 Rome 72

 Eucleides the Statistician 77

 25 A Grim Lesson 80

 26 A Visit to the Races 85 Inscriptions 91 Word Study VII 92 Review VI 95 Versiculi 99 Forms Tables 106 Vocabulary 115

 Verbs: Present and Imperfect 7 Adjectives 9

 Agreement of Adjectives 10 Verbs: Perfect Tense I 17

 Verbs: Perfect Tense II 28

 Verbs: Principal Parts 30

 Verbs: Perfect and Imperfect Tenses 35

 Nouns: Dative Case 42 Building up the Meaning IV: Dative or Ablative Case? 45

 Verbs: Future Tense I 52

 Verbs: Pluperfect Tense 63 Building up the Meaning V: Present or Future Tense? 64

 Nouns: 4th and 5th Declensions 69

 Demonstrative Adjectives: hie and ille 82

 Verbs: Future Perfect Tense 84 Prefixes: Compound Verbs 90

 Arrival at the Inn

 Raeda in fossa haerebat. Cornelii per viam ibant ad cauponam quae non procul aberat. Cornelia, quae non iam lacrimabat, cum Eucleide ambulabat. Pueros, quod praecurrebant, identidem revocabat Cornelius. Aurelia, quamquam in caupona pernoctare adhuc nolebat, lente cum Cornelio ibat.

 Mox ad cauponam appropinquabant. Neminem videbant; voces tamen 5 hominum audiebant.

 Subito duo canes e ianua cauponae se praecipitant et ferociter latrantes Cornelios petunt. Statim fugit Sextus. Stat immobilis Marcus. Aurelia perterrita exclamat. Cornelius ipse nihil facit. Cornelia tamen non fugit sed ad canes manum extendit. 10

 “Ecce, Marce!’’ inquit. “Hi canes latrant modo. Nullum est periculum. Ecce, Sexte! Caudas movent.”

 Eo ipso tempore ad ianuam cauponae apparuit homo obesus qui canes revocavit.

 “Salvete, hospites!” inquit. “In caupona mea pernoctare vultis? Hic multi 15 cives praeclari pernoctaverunt. Olim hic pernoctavit etiam legatus principis. ”

 “Salve, mi Apollodore!” interpellavit Eucleides. “Quid agis?”

 “Mehercule!” respondit caupo. “Nisi erro, meum amicum Eucleidem agnosco.”

 “Non erras,” inquit Eucleides. “Laetus te video. Quod raeda domini mei 20 in fossa haeret immobilis, necesse est hic in caupona pernoctare.”

 “Doleo,” inquit caupo, “quod raeda est in fossa, sed gaudeo quod ad meam cauponam nunc venitis. Intrate, intrate, omnes!”

 praecurro, praecurrere (3), to run ahead

 homo, hominis (m), man se praecipitant, (they) hurl themselves, rush

 fugio, fugere (3), to flee manum, hand hi canes, these dogs modo, only cauda, -ae (/), tail apparuii, (he) appeared obesus, -a, -um, fat

 revocavit, (he) called back hospes, hospitis ( m ), friend, host, guest pernoctaverunt, (they) have spent the night

 olim, once (upon a time) legatus, -I (m), envoy Quid agis? How are you? Mehercule! By Hercules! Goodness me!

 nisi erro, unless I am mistaken agnosco, agnoscere (3), to recognize doleo, dolere (2), to be sad

 5

 Exercise 17a

 Responde Latine:

 1. Quo Ibant Cornelii? ' ■ .

 2. Cur Cornelius pueros identidem revocabat?

 3. Volebatne Aurelia in caupona pernoctare?

 4. Quid canes faciunt?

 5. Qualis homo ad ianuam cauponae apparuit?

 6. Quales cives in caupona pernoctaverunt?

 7. Quis olim in caupona pernoctavit? Wm

 8. Cur necesse est in caupona pernoctare?

 9. Gaudetne caupo quod raeda est in fossa?

 Exercise 17b

 Using story 17 as a guide , give the Latin for:

 1. The inn was not far away.

 2. Cornelius kept calling the boys back.

 3. Aurelia was unwilling to spend the night in the inn.

 4. Two dogs head for the boys.

 5. The two dogs are wagging their tails.

 6. I am glad to see you.

 7. The innkeeper is sorry that the coach is in the ditch.

 Cave canem! Beware of the dog! (Pompeian inscription) Errare est humanum. To err is human. (Seneca)

 Manus manum lavat. One hand washes the other.

 U (Petronius, Satyricon 45)

 Regular Verbs

 Most Latin verbs belong to one of four conjugations:

 THE IMPERFECT TENSE

 Be sure you know all of these forms thoroughly.

 Irregular Verbs

 A few verbs do not belong to any of the four conjugations shown on the previous page, but you will notice that, except for the forms sum and possum, they have the same personal endings as the regular verbs.

 Be sure to learn these forms thoroughly.

 Exercise 17c

 Read and translate the following short sentences, paying particular attention to the tenses of the verbs:

 ^ v#

 1. Ubi manebat? 7. Quo Ire volunt?

 2. Unde veniunt? ^ 8. Quid respondebant?

 3. Cur Ire non poterant? 9. Cur praecurrebant?

 4. Quid fers? 10. Quid facere iubebat?

 5. Quid faciebatis? 11. Non poteram clamare.

 6. Tum eramus in fossa. 12. Quo Itis?

 8

 14. Quid facitis?

 15. Quid vides?

 16. Ubi haeret raeda?

 17. In via pernoctare nolumus.

 18. Quo Ibant?

 19. Ad urbem Ire non vult.

 vo ,, Adjectives

 Unde . . . ? Where .

 20. Unde veniebas?

 21. Scelesti estis.

 22. Quo equos ducit?

 23. Quo fugiebant?

 24. Cur Ire nolunt?

 25. Caupona non procul aberat.

 26. Manere nolebamus.

 . from?

 -7>

 /

 L

 Some adjectives have endings like those of 1st and 2nd declension nouns, and others have 3rd declension endings, as shown in the following chart:

 Be sure to learn these forms thoroughly.

 Notes

 1. Some adjectives that have endings of the 1st and 2nd declensions end in -er in the masculine nominative singular, e.g., miser. The feminine and neuter of this adjective are misera and miserum. In some words, the -e- is dropped from all forms except the masculine nominative singular, e.g., noster, nostra, nostrum; nostri, nostrae, nostri. Compare with the noun ager, agrl (m).

 2. Many adjectives of the 3rd declension have identical forms in the masculine and feminine, as does omnis above.

 3. The ablative singular of 3rd declension adjectives ends in -I (not -e), and the genitive plural ends in -ium. The neuter nominative and accusative plurals end in -ia. Compare these endings with those of 3rd declension nouns that you learned in Chapters 11 and 15.

 \J

 Agreement of Adjectives

 The gender, case, and number of an adjective are determined by the noun with which it agrees. Consider the following sentence:

 Multos agros, multas arbores, multa plaustra vident.

 Since agros is a masculine noun in the accusative plural, multos has a masculine accusative plural ending. Similarly, multas is feminine accusative plural agreeing with arbores, and multa is neuter accusative plural agreeing with plaustra. An adjective will agree with the noun it describes in gender , case , and number.

 There are five clues which help you to decide with which noun an adjective agrees. These are gender , case , number, sense , and position.

 1. Let us look at the first three clues (agreement of gender, case, and number):

 a. Sometimes any one of the three agreement clues will show which noun an adjective modifies:

 Mater bonos pueros laudat.

 The mother praises the good boys.

 Mater and pueros are different in gender, case, and number, and therefore all the clues in bonos are decisive.

 b. Sometimes only two of these clues are present:

 Mater bonas puellas laudat.

 The mother praises the good girls.

 In this sentence mater and puellas have the same gender, but either of the two other clues (case and number) will help.

 c. In the following sentences only one of the agreement clues is present:

 Mater bonam puellam laudat.

 The mother praises the good girl.

 Since mater and puellam have the same gender and number, only the case of bonam is decisive.

 Matrem bonum puerum laudare iubemus.

 We order the mother to praise the good boy.

 Here, it is the gender alone which is decisive.

 Matrem bonas puellas laudare iubemus.

 We order the mother to praise the good girls.

 Here, only the number is decisive.

 PM

 2. You will find examples where none of the clues of agreement will help you. When this happens, you must rely on position or sense:

 Puellam ignavam epistulam scribere iubemus.

 We order the lazy girl to write the letter.

 3. Note that either adjectives that take 1st and 2nd declension endings or adjectives of the 3rd declension may be used with nouns of any declension, as is shown in the following phrases:

 mater bona patrem bonum iter bonum itineri bono itinera bona

 omnium puellarum omnes pueri omni puero omni itinere omnia itinera

 The important thing is that the adjective must agree with the noun it modifies in gender , case , and number.

 Exercise 17d

 In the following sentences, the most important clues to meaning are those of agreement of adjectives. Sometimes words appear in an unusual order with adjectives separated from the nouns they modify.

 Read aloud and translate:

 1. Canis magnus ossa habet.

 2. Canis magna ossa habet.

 3. Multi canes ossa habent.

 4. Canis magnum os habet.

 5. Omnia ossa magnus canis habet.
part0001 

 6. Magna habent multi canes ossa.

 7. Magnum canis habet os.

 8. Omnes canes dominos non habent.

 9. Magnum habet dominus canem.

 10. Canem dominus magnum habet.

 11. Habent multi pueri magnos canes.

 12. Magnos multi habent pueri canes.

 os, ossis (n), bone

 Non omnia possumus omnes. We cannot all do everything. (Vergil , Eclogues VIII.63)

 Versiculi: "Arrival at the Inn," page 99.

 Word Study V

 Latin Suffixes -(i)tudo and -(i)tas

 A Latin adjective may form a noun by adding the suffix -(i)tudo or the suffix -(i)tas to its base. The base of a Latin adjective may be found by dropping the ending from the genitive singular, e.g., the base of magnus (genitive, magni) is magn-. Nouns formed in this way are in the 3rd declension, they are feminine, and they convey the meaning of the adjective in noun form.

 In English words derived from these nouns, -(i)tudo becomes -(i)tude and -(i)tas becomes -(i)ty. The meaning of the English derivative is usually the same as that of the Latin noun, e.g., magnitude (size), obesity (fatness).

 Exercise 1

 Give the Latin nouns which may be formed from the bases of the adjectives below. In numbers 1-4, use the suffix -(i)tudo, and in numbers 5-10, use the suffix -(i)tas. Give the English word derived from each noun formed, and give the meaning of the English word.

 1. solus, -a, -um

 2. multus, -a, -um

 3. longus, -a, -um

 4. sollicitus, -a, -um

 5. unus, -a, -um

 6. brevis, -is, -e

 7. Infirmus, -a, -um

 8. timidus, -a, -um

 9. vicinus, -a, -um

 10. humanus, -a, -um

 Latin Suffixes -Ilis, -alis, -arius

 The suffixes -ilis, -alis, and -arius may be added to the bases of many Latin nouns to form adjectives. The base of a Latin noun may be found by dropping the ending from the genitive singular, e. g., the base of vox (genitive, voc/s) is voc-. Adjectives formed in this way mean “pertaining to” the meaning of the noun from which they are formed.

 statues

 Some adjectives ending in -arius are used as nouns, e.g., statuarius, -I (m), sculptor. Can you think of similar words made from the nouns raeda, -ae (/), coach, and tabella, -ae (/), tablet, document?

 English words derived from these adjectives make the following changes in the suffixes:

 -llis becomes -il or -ile , e.g., virilis, virile -alis becomes -al , e.g., vocalis, vocal -arius becomes -ary, e.g., statuarius, statuary

 The meaning of the English derivative is similar to or the same as that of the Latin adjective, e.g., virilis in Latin and virile in English both mean “manly.” Sometimes the English word ending in -ary may be used as a noun, e.g., statuary, “a group or collection of statues,” “sculptor,” or “the art of sculpting.”

 Exercise 2

 For each English word below, give the following:

 a. the Latin adjective from which it is derived

 b. the Latin noun from which the adjective is formed

 c. the meaning of the English word.

 You may need to consult a Latin and/or English dictionary for this exercise.

 auxiliary principal

 civil puerile

 literary servile

 nominal temporal

 Combining Suffixes

 Some English words end with a combination of suffixes derived from Latin. For example, the English word principality (domain of a prince) is derived from the Latin princeps, principis (m) by the combination of the suffixes -alis (-al in English) and -itas (-ity in English).

 Exercise 3

 For each word below, give the related English noun ending in the suffix -ity. Give the meaning of the English word thus formed and give the Latin word from which it is derived.

 English Replaced by Latin Derivatives

 In the following exercise, the italicized English words are not derived from Latin. Note that these words are usually simpler and more familiar than the Latin derivatives which replace them. Latin can help with the meanings of many of these more difficult English words.

 Exercise 4

 Replace the italicized words with words of equivalent meaning chosen from the pool on page 15. Use the Latin words in parentheses to determine the meanings of the English words in the pool.

 1. Staying at an inn was much too risky for Aurelia.

 2. While he was away, Cornelius left the children in the guardianship of Eucleides.

 3. Although the driver handled the reins skillfully, he was unable to avoid disaster.

 4. It was easy to see that Eucleides was a friend of the innkeeper.

 5. The runaway slave was captured and returned to the farm.

 6. The innkeeper offered his friendly welcome to the Cornelii.

 7. The heat made the slaves’ work more burdensome.

 8. The Via Appia is full of traveling merchants, who sell their wares from town to town.

 9. Cornelia cast a sorrowful glance as she waved goodbye to Flavia.

 10. This country inn was host to all the local farmers.

 Latin Words in English

 Some Latin words are used in English in their Latin form. Many of these words have become so familiar in English that they are pluralized using English rules, e.g.:

 senator plural: senators

 area plural: areas

 Others retain their Latin plurals, e.g.:

 alumnus plural: alumni

 alumna plural: alumnae

 medium plural: media

 Sometimes both an English and a Latin plural are used, e.g.:

 index plurals: indexes , indices

 memorandum plurals: memorandums , memoranda

 Occasionally the use of two plurals may reflect more than one meaning of the word. For example, the word indexes usually refers to reference listings in a book, whereas indices are signs or indicators, e.g., “the indices of economic recovery. ”

 Exercise 5

 Look up these nouns in both an English and a Latin dictionary. For each noun, report to the class on similarities or differences between the current meaning in English and the original meaning in Latin. Be sure to note carefully the English plurals and their pronunciation.

 antenna consensus formula

 appendix crux stadium

 campus focus stimulus

 f**

 V' ' j

 18

 Settling In

 Cuncti in cauponam intraverunt.

 “Nonne cenare vultisf^Tnquit caupo. “Servi mei bonam cenam vobis statim parare possunt.”

 “Ego et Cornelia,” inquit Aurelia, “hic cenare non possumus. Duc nos statim ad cubiculum nostrum.” 5

 Servos caupo statim iussit cenam Cornelia et Marco et Sexto parare. Ipse Aureliam et Corneliam ad cubiculum ^imntPAurelia, ubi lectum vidit, gemuit.)

 —“Hic lectus est sordidus,” inquit. “Mea Cornelia in sordido lecto dormire non potest. Necesse est alium lectum in cubiculum movere.” 10

 Caupo respondit, “Cur me reprehendis? Multi viatores ad meam cauponam venire solent. Nemo meam cauponam reprehendit.”

 Iam advenit Eucleides. Ubi Aurelia rem explicavit} Eucleides quoque cauponem reprehendit.

 Caupo mussavit, “Prope viam Appiam cauponam meliorem invenire non 15 potestis. In caupona mea nulli lecti sunt sordidi.”

 Sed servos iussit alium lectum petere. Brevi tempore-servl alium lectum in cubiculum portaverunt. Caupo iam cum rlsiVolamavft, “Ecce, domina! Servi mei alium lectum tibi p^rivirunt. Nonne nunc cenare vultis?”

 “Ego non iam esurio,” inquit Cornelia. “Volo tantum cubitum Ire.” 20 “Ego q uoque,^ m quit Aurelia, “sum valde defessa.”

 Non cenaverunt Aurelia et Cornelia, sed cubitum statim Iverunt. Mox dormiebant—

 intraverunt, (they) entered

 ceno, cenare (1), to dine, eat dinneh

 cena, -ae (/), dinner

 vobis, for you

 Duc! Take! Lead!

 iussit, (he) ordered

 Cornelio, for Cornelius

 duxit,Jlie)-l ed ^

 lectus, -I (m), bed

 hiodectus, this bed

 sordidus, -a, -um, dirty

 viator, viatoris (m), traveler venire solent, (they) are in the habit of coming

 rem explicare, to explain the situation

 melior, better tibi, for you

 esurio, esurire (4), to be hungry cubitum Ire, to go to bed valde, very, exceedingly, very much Iverunt, they went

 Exercise 18a

 Responde Latine :

 1. Quid servi cauponis parare possunt?

 2. Vultne Aurelia statim cenare?

 3. Quid fecit Aurelia ubi lectum vidit?

 4. Qualis est lectus?

 5. Quid fecit Eucleides ubi Aurelia rem explicavit?

 6. Quid servi in cubiculum portaverunt?

 7. Cur Cornelia cenare non vult?

 8. Quid fecerunt Aurelia et Cornelia?

 i

 i M

 -

 Quid fecit . . . ? What did . . . do?

 VERBS: Perfect Tense I

 Compare the following pairs of sentences:

 Caupo mussat. Caupo mussavit.

 The innkeeper mutters. The innkeeper muttered.

 Davus servos iubet canes ducere. Davus orders the slaves to lead the dogs.

 Caupo servos iussit cenam parare. The innkeeper ordered the slaves to prepare

 dinner.

 Marcus gemit. Aurelia gemuit.

 Marcus groans. Aurelia groaned.

 Marcus nuntium in vlllam ducit. Marcus leads the messenger into the house. Corneliam ad cubiculum duxit. He led Cornelia to the bedroom.

 Cornelius voces hominum audit. Cornelius hears mens voices. Cornelius voces hominum audivit. Cornelius heard mens voices.

 In each of the pairs of examples listed above, the verb in the first example is in the present tense and the verb in the second example is in the perfect tense.

 The perfect tense refers, not to something that is happening (present tense) or was happening (imperfect tense), but to something that happened in the past (see examples above). It may also refer to something that has happened , e.g.:

 Servus meus alium lectum tibi My slave has prepared another bed

 paravit. for you.

 or to something that did or did not happen , e.g.:

 Aurelia non cenavit. Aurelia did not eat dinner.

 In the perfect tense, the ending of the 3rd person singular is -it; the ending of the 3rd person plural is -erunt.

 In many verbs, the stem for the perfect tense ends in -v- or -s- or -u- or -X-, e.g.:

 mussav- iuss- gemu- dux- audlv-

 The perfect endings are then added to the perfect stem, e.g.:

 mussaviY iuss it gemu it duxit audlvjY

 mussa verunt iuss erunt gemu erunt duxerunt audiverunt

 Here are some more examples:

 Singular Plural

 Exercise 18b

 Give the missing forms and meanings to complete the following table:

 Exercise 18c

 Read the following passage and answer the questions in full Latin sentences:

 Cornelii per viam ad cauponam lente ambulabant.

 Sextus, “Nonne ille tabellarius equos vehementer incitavit, Marce?”

 Cui respondit Marcus, “Ita vero! Eos ferociter verberavit. Equi cisium celeriter traxerunt. Raedarius noster, ‘Cave, sceleste!’ magna voce exclamavit. Tum raedam devertebat, sed frustra. Tabellarius tamen neque cisium devertit 5 neque raedam vitavit. Itaque equi raedam in fossam traxerunt. Gemuit raedarius; gemuerunt pater et mater; lacrimavit Cornelia.”

 “Pater tuus certe iratus erat,” interpellavit Sextus. “Statim virgam arripuit et miserum raedarium verberabat. Cornelia, ubi hoc vidit, iterum lacrimavit. ‘Pater! Pater!’ inquit. ‘Noli miserum hominem verberare!’ ” 10

 “Tum pater,” inquit Marcus. “Corneliam tacere iussit. Omnes solliciti caelum spectaverunt quod iam advesperascebat. Pater igitur Eucleidem nos ad cauponam ducere iussit.”

 Mox cauponam conspexerunt. Intraverunt Cornelii et brevi tempore cenaverunt. 15

 vehementer incitare, to drive hard cui, to whom, to him, to her certe, certainly arripuit, he seized hoc, this

 1 .

 2 .

 3.

 4.

 5.

 6 .

 7.

 8 .

 What did the driver shout?

 Where did the horses drag the coach?

 What did Cornelius and Aurelia do when the coach went into the ditch? What did Cornelia do?

 What did Cornelius seize?

 What did Cornelia say when Cornelius beat the coachman?

 What did Cornelius order Cornelia to do?

 What did Cornelius do when he saw that it was getting dark?

 Exercise 18d

 Read aloud and translate:

 Dum Cornelii ad cauponam lente ibant, raedarius equos custodiebat. Miser erat quod Cornelium timebat. Mox adveniunt duo servi cauponis.

 “Salve!” inquiunt. “Quid accidit? Quid faciebas? Raedamne ferociter agebas? Cur non diligenter viam spectabas? Dormiebasne?”

 Sed raedarius miser, “Minime vero!” respondet. “Raedam magna arte 5 agebam. Pueri me vexabant; tacere nolebant. Ego certe non dormiebam. Sed cur vos adestis? Vultisne me adiuvare? Potestisne raedam ex fossa extrahere?” Tum omnes diu laborabant, sed raedam neque servi neque equi extrahere poterant. Tandem defessi ad cauponam redeunt.

 “Raedam movere non poteramus,” inquiunt. “Necesse est magnum nu- 10 merum servorum mittere.”

 accidit, (it) happened adsum, adesse ( irreg .), to be present

 diligenter, carefully adiuvo, adiuvare (1), to help

 Bed reconstructed from fragments in the National Roman Museum.

 Graffiti from Ancient Inns

 I

 Assibus hic bibitur; dlpundium si dederis, meliora bibes; quattus si dederis, vina Falerna bibes.

 A drink is had here for one as; if you pay two, you ll drink better (wines); if you pay four, you’ll drink Falemian.

 II

 Viator, audi. Si libet, intus veni: tabula est aena quae te cuncta perdocet.

 Traveler, listen. Come inside if you like: there’s a bronze tablet which gives you all the information.

 III

 Talia te fallant utinam mendacia, caupo: tu vendis aquam et bibis ipse merum.

 I hope these deceptions get you into trouble, innkeeper: you sell water and drink the pure wine yourself.

 IV

 Mlximus in lecto. Fateor, peccavimus, hospes.

 Si dices, “Quare?” Nulla matella fuit.

 I wet the bed. I have sinned , I confess it, O host.

 If you ask why: there was no chamber-pot.

 V

 “Caupo, computemus.”

 “Habes vini (sextarium) I, panem a. I, pulmentar. a. II.” “Convenit.”

 “Pueli, a. VIII. ’

 “Et hoc convenit.”

 “Faenum mulo a. II.”

 “Iste mulus me ad factum dabit!”

 “Innkeeper, let’s reckon up (the bill).”

 u You have I pint of wine, 1 as-worth of bread, 2 asses-worth of food.” “Right.”

 “Girl, 8 asses. ”

 “That’s right, too.”

 “Fodder for the mule, 2 asses.”

 “That darn mule is going to bankrupt me!”

 Horace's Journey

 This account of Horace’s journey from Rome to Brundisium describes some of the hazards with which travelers might be faced:

 After I had left great Rome, I put up in Aricia in a humble inn. My companion was Heliodorus, a teacher of rhetoric. From there we went to Forum Appii, a town packed with boatmen and grasping innkeepers. We were idle enough to take this part of the journey in two stages; for the more energetic it is only one; the Appian Way is less tiring for leisurely travelers. Here, because of the water, which is very bad, I suffered an upset stomach; and it was in a bad temper that I waited for my companions to finish their evening meal.

 As we were about to go on board, the boatmen began to argue. A whole hour went past while the fares were being collected and the mule harnessed. The vicious mosquitoes and marsh-frogs made sleep impossible while the boatman, who had drunk too much cheap wine, sang of his absent girlfriend, and a passenger joined in the singing.

 At last the weary passengers fell asleep; and the idle boatman turned the mule out to graze, fastened its halter to a stone, and lay on his back snoring.

 At dawn we realized we weren’t moving. A hot-tempered passenger leapt up and beat the boatman and the mule with a stick. When at last we disembarked, it was almost ten o’clock. With due reverence and ceremony we washed our hands and faces in the fountain of Feronia. After lunch we “crawled” the three miles * to Anxur, which is perched on rocks that shine white in the distance. There our very good friend Maecenas was due to meet us. As my eyes were giving me trouble, I smeared black ointment on them. Meanwhile, Maecenas arrived with that perfect gentleman, Fonteius Capito. We were glad to leave Fundi behind, with its self-appointed “praetor” Aufidius Luscus. How we laughed at the official get-up of the ambition-crazy clerk, his toga praetexta and the tunic with the broad stripe. At last, tired out, we stayed in the city of Formiae, where Murena provided accommodation and Capito a meal.

 The next day we reached Sinuessa and were met by Varius, Plotius, and Vergil—friends to whom I was most attached. Then a small villa next to the Campanian bridge gave us shelter; and the official purveyors, as they were obliged to do, provided us with wood and salt. After we left here, our pack-mules were unsaddled early at Capua. Maecenas went to play ball, Vergil and I to sleep; for ball games are bad for a man with sore eyes and an upset stomach. After Capua, Cocceius received us in a house with ample provisions built above the inns of Caudium.

 * about two and three-fourths modern English miles or four and a half kilometers.

 From here we made our way right on to Beneventum, where the overworked innkeeper nearly burned the place down while roastipg lean thrushes on a spit. Soon after leaving Beneventum, I saw again the familiar mountains of my native Apulia. We would never have struggled over those mountains if we had not found lodgings at Trivicum. There the smoke made our eyes water, for they put green branches on the fire, leaves and all. There also I waited until midnight for a deceitful girl who never showed up. What a fool I was!

 From here we sped on twenty-four miles * in carriages, intending to lodge in the small town of Ausculum. Here they charge for the cheapest of all commodities—water. The bread, however, is very good indeed, so that the experienced traveler usually takes some away in his bag; for the bread at Canusium is as hard as a stone, and the water supply is no better.

 From here we arrived at Rubi, tired out—as was to be expected—for the stage was long and the road conditions difficult because of heavy rain. After this the weather was better, but the road worse as far as Barium, a fishing town. Then Egnatia provided us with laughter and amusement: the people tried to convince us that in the temple there frankincense melts without a flame. I don’t believe it!

 Brundisium is the end of my long account and of my long journey.

 Horace, Satires 1.5 (abridged)

 * about 22 modern English miles or 36 kilometers.

 Although the following account given by Cicero of how one provincial governor traveled is probably exaggerated, there is no doubt that the rich and powerful often went to great lengths to avoid the discomforts of travel:

 Verres traveled in a litter carried by eight bearers. In the litter was a cushion of transparent Maltese linens stuffed with roseleaves. He held to his nose a close-mesh bag filled with rosepetals. Whenever he reached a town, he was carried, still in his litter, direct to his bedroom.

 Cicero, in Verrem 11.27

 Travel by Land

 Gaius Cornelius and his family traveled from Baiae to Rome along a section of the Via Appia, which ran south from Rome to Brundisium —a distance of 358 miles or 576 kilometers. It was part of a network of major highways that radiated from the Golden Milestone (miliarium aureum), in the Forum at Rome, to all parts of the Empire. These roads, originally built by the legions to make easy movement of troops possible, were laid on carefully made foundations with drainage channels at both sides and were usually paved with slabs of basalt. Although travel was safer and easier than at any time before the “Railway Age,” it was nevertheless extremely slow by modern standards. The raeda seldom averaged more than five miles or eight kilometers per hour; a man walking might manage twenty-five miles or forty kilometers a day; an imperial courier on urgent business might, with frequent changes of horse, manage to cover over 150 miles or 240 kilometers in twenty-four hours. Since carriage wheels had iron rims and vehicles lacked springs, a journey by road was bound to be uncomfortable. Moreover, since the vehicles were open or, at best, had only a canopy, the travelers often had to endure both clouds of dust and attacks from insects.

 The following passage illustrates these discomforts:

 When I had to make my way back from Baiae to Naples, to avoid the experience of sailing a second time, I easily convinced myself that a storm was raging. The whole road was so deep in mud that I might as well have gone by sea. That day I had to endure what athletes put up with as a matter of course: after being anointed with mud, we were dusted with sand in the Naples tunnel. Nothing could be longer than that prison-like corridor, nothing dimmer than those torches that do not dispel the darkness but merely make us more aware of it. But even if there were light there, it would be blacked out by the dust which, however troublesome and disagreeable it may be in the open, is, as you can imagine, a thousand times worse in an enclosed space where there is no ventilation and the dust rises in one's face. These were the two entirely different discomforts which we suffered. On the same day and on the same road we struggled through both mud and dust.

 Seneca, Epistulae Morales LVII

 Chance Encounter

 Ubi Cornelia et mater cubitum Iverunt, Marcus et Sextus cum Cornelio manserunt. Cum Cornelio cenare et post cenam ad mediam noctem vigilare in animo habuerunt, nam omnia videre et omnia audire voluerunt.

 Marcus, “Esurio, pater,” inquit. “Esurlsne tu quoque, Sexte?”

 “Ita vero!” respondit Sextus. 5

 “Semper esuritis, tu et Marcus!” exclamavit Cornelius.

 “Licetne nobis,” inquit Marcus, “hic cenare?”

 Paulisper tacebat pater, sed tandem, “Esto!” inquit. “Tibi et Sexto licet hic cenare. Post cenam tamen necesse est statim cubitum Ire.”

 Riserunt pueri quod laeti erant. “Gaudemus, pater,” inquit Marcus, 10 “quod nos in cubiculum non statim misisti. Voluimus enim hic manere et alios viatores spectare.”

 Tum Cornelius cauponem iussit cibum parare. Brevi tempore servus cibum ad eos portavit. Dum pueri cibum devorant, subito intravit miles quidam. Cornelium attente spectavit. “Salve, vir optime!” inquit. “Salvete, 15 pueri! Cur vos in hanc cauponam intravistis? Cur non ad villam hospitis Ivistis? Nonne tu es senator Romanus?”

 “Senator Romanus sum,” respondit Cornelius. “Nos in hanc cauponam intravimus quod raeda nostra in fossa haeret immobilis. In agris nocte manere nolebamus, sed numquam antea in caupona pernoctavimus. Certe in agris 20 pernoctare est periculosum.”

 Tum miles, “Etiam in caupona pernoctare saepe est periculosum.”

 “Cur hoc nobis dicis?” rogavit Cornelius. “Estne hic caupo homo scelestus? De Apollodoro quid audivisti?”

 “De Apollodoro nihil audivi, sed semper est periculosum in caupona 25 pernoctare. Vosne audivistis illam fabulam de caupone narratam? Ille caupo hospitem necavit.”

 “Minimq!” inquit Cornelius. “Illam fabulam non audivi. Cur igitur nobis illam non narras dum cenamus?”

 manserunt, (they) stayed

 post ( -I- acc .), after

 media nox, midnight

 vigilo, vigilare (1), to stay awake

 in animo habere, to intend

 licet nobis, we are allowed, we may

 paulisper, for a short time

 Esto! All right!

 0 ^

 u

 27

 (V

 misisti, you have sent voluimus, we wanted enim, for

 miles quidam, a certain soldier miles, militis (m), soldier vir optime! sir!

 optimus, -a, -um, best, very good in hanc cauponam, into this inn

 numquam, never antea, before dico, dicere (3), to say de (+ abi), about audivi, I have heard

 illam fabulam de caupone narratam, that famous story told about the innkeeper neco, necare (1), to kill narro, narrare (1), to tell (a story)

 Exercise 19 a

 Responde Latine :

 1. Quid fecerunt Marcus et Sextus ubi Cornelia et Aurelia cubitum Iverunt?

 2. Quid pueri facere voluerunt?

 3. Esuriuntne pueri?

 4. Licetne Marco et Sexto in caupona cenare?

 5. Cur pueri laeti sunt?

 6. Quis intravit dum pueri cibum devorant?

 7. Quid rogat?

 8. Cur Cornelius in agris pernoctare nolebat?

 9. Quid miles de Apollodoro audivit?

 10. Quid fecit caupo in fabula?

 Exercise 19b

 Using story 19 as a guide, give the Latin for.

 1. Marcus and Sextus wished to stay awake until midnight.

 2. Cornelius ordered the slave to bring food.

 3. Soon a soldier entered and suddenly looked at Cornelius.

 4. Cornelius said, “I came into this inn because my carriage is stuck in a ditch.”

 5. Cornelius has never before spent the night in an inn.

 6. What has the soldier heard about Apollodorus?

 7. Cornelius has not heard that famous story told about the innkeeper.

 VERBS: Perfect Tense II

 You have now met all the endings of the perfect tense.

 These are the endings of the perfect tense of all Latin verbs, e.g.:

 Exercise 19 c

 With proper attention to the new perfect tense endings , read aloud and translate:

 1. Marcus et Sextus ad mediam noctem vigilare in animo habuerunt.

 2. Ego et tu cubitum Ire noluimus.

 3. Mllesne Cornelium spectavit?

 4. Cur voluisti hic pernoctare, Marce?

 5. Cur in caupona pernoctavistis, pueri? Licetne filio senatoris in cauponam intrare?

 6. Cornelius in cubiculum servum Ire iussit.

 7. Pueri laeti fuerunt quod ad mediam noctem vigilaverunt.

 8. Dum Cornelius et pueri cenant, miles fabulam narravit.

 9. Ego et Cornelius in agris manere timebamus.

 10. Omnia videre et audire volunt quod numquam antea in caupona pernoctaverunt.

 fui, I was (perfect of sum)

 Exercise 19 d

 Supply the appropriate perfect tense endings , read aloud, and translate:

 1. Ego liberos in horto petlv ; tu eos in silva inven 

 2. Ubi tunica Sextl in ramis haerebat, nos omnes rls 

 3. Quo Ivisti, Cornelia? Ego et Marcus patrem hoc rogav , sed ille

 nihil respond 

 4. Quamquam Sextus fu molestus, servi eum non

 verberav 

 5. Ubi heri fu , Marce et Cornelia? Pater et mater nos iuss 

 hic manere.

 6. Postquam vos cenav , cubitum Ire volu 

 7. Heri nos ad urbem Iv , sed matrem ibi non vld 

 8. “Unde ven , amici?” roga caupo. “Quo nunc Itis?”

 9. Tune Cornelium vld , ubi tu Romam adven ? Ego

 certe eum non vld 

 10. Ille, postquam hoc audlv , e caupona se praecipita v 

 ille, he

 heri, yesterday postquam, after

 Roman Hospitality

 Because inns were dirty and often dangerous, well-to-do Romans tried to avoid staying in them. Instead, they tried to plan their journey so that they could stay at the villa of a hospes. This word means “host” or “guest,” but it is also translated as “friend,” although in this special sense it has no exact equivalent in English. It describes a relationship established between two families in the past and kept up by every succeeding generation. As a result of such a relationship, a traveler could go to the house of his “family friend”—whom in some cases he personally might never have met—and claim hospitium for the night, producing, if need be, some token such as a coin that had been halved as proof of the link between the two families. Members of the host’s family, if they happened to be traveling in a district in which their guest’s family owned a villa, could claim similar rights of hospitality. It could extend to other situations. For instance, if a Roman had business interests in one of the provinces, someone residing there might look after them for him. In return, he might have some service done for him in Rome. Cornelius, you may remember, is responsible for Sextus’ education while his father is in Asia.

 VERBS: Principal Parts

 When we refer to a Latin verb, we normally give the four principal parts , from which all forms of that verb may be derived. These principal parts are: the 1st person singular of the present tense the present infinitive

 the 1st person singular of the perfect tense the supine.

 |VA <ci f w

 Be sure to learn the above forms thoroughly.

 Notes

 1. The perfect stem is found by dropping the -I from the end of the third principal part of the verb. The perfect endings are then added directly to this stem.

 2. The principal parts of most verbs in the 1st, 2nd, and 4th conjugations follow the patterns on the opposite page. There is no set pattern for 3rd conjugation verbs.

 3. In vocabulary lists from this point on, the verbs in the 1st, 2nd, and 4th conjugations which follow the set patterns will appear as follows:

 clamo (1), to shout appareo (2), to appear punio (4), to punish

 When they do not follow the pattern, they will be given in full, e.g.:

 lavo, lavare (1), lavl, lavatum, to wash venio, venire (4), veni, ventum, to come

 Third conjugation verbs will be given in full, e.g.:

 duco, ducere (3), duxi, ductum, to lead

 Exercise 19e

 Read aloud and translate each verb form given at the left below. Then deduce and give the first three principal parts for each verb:

 Murder

 Miles hanc fabulam narravit.

 Duo amici, Aulus et Septimus, dum iter in Graecia faciunt, ad urbem Megaram venerunt. Aulus in caupona pernoctavit, in villa hospitis Septimus. Media nocte, dum Septimus dormit, Aulus in somno ei apparuit et clamavit “Age, Septime! Fer mihi auxilium! Caupo me necare parat.”

 Septimus, somnio perterritus, statim surrexit et, postquam animum recuperavit, “Nihil mali,” inquit. “Somnium modo fuit.”

 Deinde iterum obdormivit. Iterum tamen in somno Aulus suo amico apparuit; iterum Septimo clamavit, “Ubi ego auxilium petivi, tu non venisti. Nemo me adiuvare nunc potest. Caupo enim me necavit. Postquam hoc fecit, corpus meum in plaustro posuit et stercus supra coniecit. In animo habet plaustrum ex urbe cras movere. Necesse est igitur cras mane plaustrum petere et cauponem punire.”

 Iterum surrexit Septimus. Prima luce ad cauponam Ivit et plaustrum petivit. Ubi plaustrum invenit, stercus removit et corpus extraxit. Septimus, ubi amicum mortuum vidit, lacrimavit. Caupo scelestus quoque lacrimavit, nam innocentiam simulabat. Septimus tamen cauponem statim accusavit. Mox cives eum puniverunt.

 Postquam miles fabulam finivit, silentium fuit. Subito Cornelius exclamavit, “Agite, pueri! Nonne vos iussi post cenam cubitum Ire? Cur ad cubiculum non Ivistis?”

 Sed Marcus, “Pater, nos quoque fabulam militis audire voluimus. Non defessi sumus. Non sero est.”

 Hoc tamen dixit Marcus quod cubitum Ire timebat. Dum enim fabulam militis audiebat, cauponem spectabat. Cogitabat, “Quam scelestus ille caupo videtur! Certe in animo habet media nocte me necare. Necesse est vigilare.”

 Etiam Sextus timebat. Cogitabat tamen, “Si hic caupo est scelestus, gaudeo quod miles in caupona pernoctat. Eucleides certe nos adiuvare non potest.”

 Inviti tandem pueri cubitum Iverunt, vigilare parati. Mox tamen semisomni fuerunt. Brevi tempore obdormivit Marcus.

 5

 10

 15

 20

 25

 30

 32

 animum recuperare, to regain one’s

 supra, above, on top prlma luce, at dawn mortuus, -a, -um, dead simulo (1), to pretend finio (4), to finish sero, late

 cogito (1), to think videtur, (he) seems invitus, -a, -um, unwilling

 senses, be fully awake

 Nihil mail. There is nothing wrong, obdormio (4), to gu to ^leep

 corpus, corporis (n), body

 stercu s, stercoris (n), dung, manure

 surgo, surgere (3), surrexl, surrectum, to rise, get up

 sum, esse ( irreg .), ful, to be

 adiuvo, adiuvare (1), adiuvl, adiutum, to help

 pono, ponere (3), posui, positum, to place, put

 conicio, conicere (3), conieci, coniectum, to throw

 eo, Ire, (irreg.), Ivi, itum, to go

 peto, petere (3), petivi, petitum, to look for, seek

 invenio, invenire (4), inveni, inventum, to come upon, find

 removeo, removere (2), removi, remotum, to remove

 extraho, extrahere (3), extraxi, extractum, to drag out

 video, videre (2), vidi, visum, to see

 iubeo, iubere (2), iussl, iussum, to order, bid

 volo, velle (irreg.), volui, to wish, want, be willing

 dico, dicere (3), dixl, dictum, to say, tell

 Responde Latine :

 1. Ubi est Megara?

 2. Ubi pernoctavit Aulus? Ubi erat amicus Auli?

 3. Quando Aulus Septimo apparuit?

 4. Quid fecit Septimus postquam animum recuperavit?

 5. Ubi caupo corpus Auli posuit? Quid in animo habuit?

 6. Quid Septimus prima luce fecit?

 7. Quando lacrimavit Septimus?

 Exercise 20a

 8. Cur lacrimavit caupo?

 9. Quid cives fecerunt?

 10. Quid Marcus timebat?

 11. Quomodo pueri cubitum Iverunt?

 12. Quid Marcus et Sextus in animo habuerunt?

 Quando. . . ? When. . . ?

 Exercise 20b

 The following sentences contain errors of fact in the light of the last story you read. Explain these errors and give new Latin sentences which correct them:

 1. Duo pueri, Aulus et Septimus, urbem Romam intraverunt.

 2. Aulus et Septimus fratres Marci erant.

 3. Septimus media nocte surrexit quod esuriebat.

 4. Aulus auxilium petivit quod lectus sordidus erat.

 5. Cives, postquam Septimum necaverunt, corpus sub stercore celaverunt.

 6. Caupo Septimum accusavit postquam civem mortuum invenit.

 7. Septimus cives punire in animo habuit quod scelesti erant.

 8. Cives corpus in caupona sub lecto invenerunt.

 9. Marcus cubitum Ire timuit quod silentium erat.

 10. Cornelius cauponem punivit quod Marcus eum accusavit.

 Exercise 20c

 Using the list of principal parts given in the vocabulary on page 33, give the Latin for.

 1. What did you want, boys?

 2. They got up suddenly.

 3. The boys went to bed at last.

 4. Septimus looked for the wagon.

 5. What have you seen?

 6. We went to the inn.

 7. What did you say, Marcus?

 8. We ordered Cornelia to go to sleep.

 9. What have they found?

 10. He placed the body in the wagon.

 Veni, vidi, vici. I came , I saw , I conquered. (Julius Caesar, after the battle of Zela, 47 B.C.; reported in Suetonius, Julius Caesar XXXVII)

 Nihil sub sole novum. Theres nothing new under the sun. (Vulgate, Ecclesiastes 1.10)

 Mens sana in corpore sano. A sound mind in a sound body. (Juvenal X. 356)

 34

 VERBS: Perfect and Imperfect

 The imperfect tense describes an action in the past which

 a. went on for a time, or

 b. was repeated, or

 c. was beginning to happen.

 The perfect tense describes an action in the past which happened or was completed on one occasion, e.g.:

 Hoc dixit Marcus quod cubitum Ire timebat.

 Marcus said this because he was afraid to go to bed.

 Virgam arripuit et raedarium verberabat.

 He grabbed the stick and beat the driver repeatedly.

 Cornelii solliciti caelum spectaverunt quod iam advesperascebat.

 The Cornelii looked anxiously at the sky because it was already

 getting dark.

 Exercise 20 d

 Read aloud and translate , paying particular attention to the tenses of the verbs:

 1. Marcus sub arbore sedebat, sed subito surrexit.

 2. Iam advesperascebat ubi viatores aedificia urbis conspexerunt.

 3. Cauponam non intravimus quod ibi pernoctare timebamus.

 4. Caupo prope portam laborabat ubi clamorem audivit.

 5. Ubi Aurelia cubiculum intravit, Cornelia adhuc dormiebat.

 6. “Tacete, omnes!” exclamavit Davus, nam dominus appropinquabat.

 7. Postquam Aurelia rem explicavit, Eucleides quoque dolebat.

 8. Tu, Sexte, mox obdormivisti, sed ego diu vigilabam.

 9. Caupo mussabat quod servos alium lectum petere iussistl.

 10. Sextus cauponam statim petivit quod canes latrabant.

 Quid hoc somnio dici potest divinius? What can be said to be more divinely inspired than this dream? (Cicero, On Divination 1.57, after telling the story of Aulus and Septimus)

 Versiculi: "Murder,” page 99.

 Review IV

 Exercise IVa

 Supply Latin nouns or adjectives to match the English cues. Be sure to give the correct endings. Read each sentence aloud and translate it.

 1. Puellae ad cubiculum Iverunt, quod dormire nolebant, (un-

 willing)

 2. Multi servi lectos e cubiculis portaverunt, (all)

 3. Corpora amicorum vidimus, (of all)

 (our dead)

 4. Servi scelesti ip plaustro posuerunt, (all the bodies)

 5. Civis cauponem necavit, (fat)

 6. Lecti sunt in caupona, (dirty) (every)

 7. Caupo fabulam de scelesto narravit, (innkeeper)

 8. Miles longam fabulam de narravit, (all the inn-

 keepers)

 9. Corpus hominis in plaustro posuimus, (dead)

 10. In cauponam prope urbem intravistis, (every)

 Exercise IVb

 Identify the tense, person, and number of each of the following verb forms. Then give the principal parts of the verb:

 1. veniebatis

 Tense Person Number

 2. cogitavistis

 3. coniciebam

 4. iusserunt

 5. surrexl

 6. removebas

 7. clamavisti

 8. obdormiebamus

 Exercise IVc

 Give the requested forms of the following verbs in the present, imperfect, and perfect tenses:

 Present Imperfect Perfect

 1. dicer e (2nd sing.) 

 2. Ire ( 3rd pi.) 

 3. apparere ( 1st pi) 

 4. iacere (1st sing.) 

 5. lavare (3rd sing.) 

 6. punire (2nd pi.) 

 Exercise IVd

 Give the imperatives of the following verbs:

 Singular Plural

 1. Ire 

 2. ponere 

 3. ferre 

 4. explicare 

 5. nolle 

 6. esse 

 7. dolere 

 8. venire 

 Exercise IVe

 Change the following verbs to the present tense and the perfect tense where requested. Keep the same person and number.

 Present Perfect

 1. poterat 

 2. volebam 

 3. ferebas 

 4. eramus 

 5. nolebas 

 6. Ibant 

 7. volebatis 

 8. eras 

 9. ferebatis 

 10. nolebat 

 Exercise IVf

 Read, aloud and translate:

 Sextus tamen non obdormivit, nam de militis fabula cogitabat. Itaque diu vigilabat et de Aulo mortuo cogitabat. Tandem, “Marce!” inquit. “Tune timuisti ubi illam fabulam audivisti?”

 Sed Marcus nihil respondit. Iterum, “Marce!” inquit. “Tune cauponem spectabas?” Iterum silentium! Deinde Sextus, iam timidus, “Marce! Marce!” inquit. “Cur tu obdormivisti? Cur tu non vigilavisti?”

 Subito sonitum in cubiculo audivit Sextus. “O me miserum! Audlvitne sonitum Aulus ille miser ubi caupo eum necare parabat? Qualis sonitus fuit?” Sonitum Sextus iterum audivit. “O Eucleides!” inquit. “Cur ad cubiculum nondum venisti? O pater! O mater! Cur me in Italiam misistis? Voluistisne ita me ad mortem mittere? In Asiam ego redire volo. Ibi enim nullum est periculum, sed periculosum est hic in Italia habitare.”

 Multa se rogabat Sextus, nam, quamquam puer temerarius esse solebat, nunc media nocte solus in cubiculo tremebat.

 Itaque Sextus, per totam noctem vigilare paratus, diu ibi sedebat. “Quomodo iam e manibus cauponis scelesti effugere possum? Suntne omnes caupones scelesti? Fortasse caupo me, filium civis praeclari, necare in animo habet. Quamquam Aulus aurum habuit, ego tamen nihil habeo, neque aurum neque pecuniam.”

 Ita cogitabat Sextus. Iterum sonitum audivit. Timebat sed tandem surrexit invitus, nam omnes cubiculi partes Inspicere volebat. Mox tamen risit. Ecce! Sub lecto erat feles, obesa et semisomna. Prope felem Sextus murem mortuum vidit. Mussavit Sextus, “Non necesse est hoc corpus sub stercore celare!” sonitum, sound e manibus, from the hands

 ita, in this way aurum, -I (n), gold

 mors, mortis ( f), death pecunia, -ae ( f), money

 se rogabat, (he) asked feles, felis ( f ), cat

 himself, wondered mus, muris (m), mouse

 totus, -a, -um, whole

 tremo, tremere (3), tremui, to tremble

 Inspicio, Inspicere (3), Inspexi, Inspectum, to examine

 Exercise IVg

 In the above passage, locate the following in sequence:

 1. All verbs in the present tense. 3. All verbs in the perfect tense.

 2. All verbs in the imperfect tense. 4. All infinitives.

 5

 10

 15

 20

 Eavesdropping

 It was quite dark. Cornelia was still wide awake. All kinds of exciting sounds were floating up from the inn downstairs, inviting her to go down and have a look. She slipped out of bed, put a shawl around her shoulders, and tiptoed into the corridor where Eucleides was on guard.

 “Take me downstairs, Eucleides/’ she wheedled. “I’ve never seen the inside of an inn before.” This was quite true, because a Roman away from home preferred to stay in a friend’s villa and avoided inns if possible.

 Eucleides took a lot of persuading, but Cornelia could always get around him; he soon found himself downstairs, looking into the main room, with Cornelia peering from behind his arm.

 It was pretty dark inside, despite the lamps. The atmosphere was thick with smoke and reeked of garlic. On the far side Cornelia could see her father; and nearer were other customers seated on stools at rough tables, and an evil-looking group they were.

 “Stay away from them, Cornelia,” whispered Eucleides. “Those rogues would murder their own mothers for a silver denarius.

 But Eucleides needn’t have worried because they were all absorbed in what was going on at the far end of the low room, where a girl was dancing. Above the hum of conversation her singing could be heard to the accompaniment of a rhythmic clacking noise she seemed to be making with her fingers. “Makes that noise with castanets,” whispered Eucleides. “Dancing girl from Spain, probably Gades.”

 But one person was not paying much attention to the entertainment— the tabellarius, whose reckless driving had ditched them. He had not come out of the incident unscathed. One of his horses had gone lame, and he was making the most of the enforced delay, drinking the innkeeper’s best Falernian.

 As Cornelia and Eucleides entered, the innkeeper was bringing forward a young man to introduce him to the imperial courier. “This is Decimus Junius Juvenalis, Sir, a soldier like yourself.” The tabellarius, unbending slightly as a rather haggard young man came forward wearing the insignia of a junior officer, dismissed the innkeeper with a look and said pleasantly enough, “Greetings, young man! Where are you from?”

 “I’m on my way back from service in Britain, sir. What a place! They don’t have any climate there, just bad weather! Mist, rain, hail, snow—the lot! Hardly a blink of sunshine!”

 “Perhaps he knows our Davus,” whispered Cornelia.

 “Let me see!” said the tabellarius. “Who's governor of Britain these days? A chap called Agricola, I hear.”

 “That's right!” replied Juvenalis. “A madman, if you ask me. He's not content with conquering the bit of Britain that's near Gaul, where you can get something profitable, like silver or wool or hides or those huge hunting dogs. Before 1 left he had gone to the very edge of the world where the Caledonii live. They say that there, in the middle of winter, the sun doesn't shine at all! But I can't vouch for that myself!”

 “I’ve been to Britain too,” said the tabellarius, much interested. “I’m not an ordinary tabellarius, you know. I'm really in charge of a section of the cursus publicus. I personally carry dispatches only if they are confidential messages from. ...”

 And here he whispered something in Juvenalis’ ear which Cornelia could not catch.

 The innkeeper sidled up again with some more wine.

 “We get lots of interesting people stopping here on the Via Appia,” he confided. “Not only military gentlemen like yourselves, or that scum of humanity there”—jerking his thumb towards the dancer's audience—“hut special envoys to the Emperor himself. When Nero was Emperor, we had one of this new Jewish religious sect who lodged here on a journey all the way from Judaea, to be tried by the Emperor himself no less! He was called Paul or something. ...”

 Suddenly Cornelia felt her ear seized between finger and thumb and looked around into the eyes of a very angry Aurelia. She found herself upstairs and back in bed before she knew what had happened.

 40

 From the Inn to Rome

 lam dies erat. Prima luce raedarius auxilio servorum cauponis raedam e fossa extraxit et ad cauponam admovit. Tum servi cistas Corneliorum raedario tradiderunt. Interea in caupona, dum omnes se parabant, Sextus, iam immemor terroris nocturni, militis fabulam Corneliae narrabat; Eucleides mandata servis dabat. Cornelius ipse Aureliae et liberis clamabat, “Agite, omnes! Nolite cessare! Tempus est discedere.”

 Tandem cuncti e caupona venerunt et in raedam ascenderunt.

 “Vale!” clamaverunt pueri.

 “Valete!” respondit caupo, qui in via stabat. “Nolite in fossam iterum cadere! Non in omnibus cauponis bene dormire potestis.”

 Tum raedarius habenas sumpsit et equos verberavit. Tandem Romam iterum petebant.

 In itinere Sextus omnia de mure mortuo Marco explicavit, Cornelius militis fabulam uxori narravit. Iam urbi appropinquabant, cum subito pueri ingens aedificium conspexerunt.

 Marcus patrem, “Quid est illud?” rogavit.

 Atque Sextus, “Quis in illo aedificio habitat?”

 Cui Cornelius, “Nemo ibi habitat,” cum risu respondit. “Est sepulcrum Messallae Corvini qui erat orator praeclarus. Hic sunt sepulcra multorum et praeclarorum civium quod Romanis non licet intra urbem sepulcra habere.”

 Mox alterum aedificium magnum viderunt.

 “Estne id quoque sepulcrum, pater?” rogavit Marcus.

 “Ita vero!” Cornelius respondit. “Est sepulcrum Caeciliae Metellae. Nonne de Caecilia Metella audivisti?”

 Sed Marcus patri nihil respondit. Iam enim urbem ipsam videre poterat. “Ecce Roma!” clamavit.

 “Ecce Roma! Ecce Roma!” clamaverunt Sextus et Cornelia.

 Tum Cornelius, “Brevi tempore ad Portam Capenam adveniemus et Titum, patruum vestrum, ibi videbimus. Epistulam enim per servum misi et omnia ei explicavi. Titus mox nos prope Portam excipiet.”

 5

 10

 15

 20

 25

 30

 41

 auxilio, with the help raedario, to the coachman se parare, to prepare oneself, get ready immemor, immemoris, forgetful noctumus, -a, -urn, during the night Corneliae, to Cornelia mandatum, -I (n), order, instruction bene, well

 habenae, -arum (f pi), reins mus, muris (m), mouse ^ uxori, to his wife

 cum, when ingens, ingentis^ huge illud, that atque, and

 sepulcrum, -i (n), tomb intra (+ acc.), inside adveniemus, we will come patruus, -i (m), uncle vester, vestra, vestrum, your (pi) videbimus, we will see excipiet, (he) will welcome

 admoveo, admovere (2), admovi, admotum, to move towards trado, tradere (3), tradidi, traditum, to hand over do, dare (1), dedi, datum, to give (note short a) ascendo, ascendere (3), ascendi, ascensum, to climb respondeo, respondere (2), respondi, responsum, to reply cado, cadere (3), cecidi, casum, to fall sumo, sumere (3), sumpsi, sumptum, to take, take up conspicio, conspicere (3), conspexi, conspectum, to catch sight of excipio, excipere (3), excepi, exceptum, to welcome, receive

 NOUNS: Cases and Declensions

 Dative Case

 Look at the following sentences:

 1. Fabulam Corneliae narrabat.

 2. Omnia Marco explicavit.

 3. Mandata servis dabat.

 4. Marcus patri nihil respondit.

 5. Aulus ei apparuit.

 6. Lectum tibi paraverunt.

 He was telling a story to Cornelia. He explained everything to Marcus. He was giving orders to the slaves. Marcus made no reply to his father. A ulus appeared to him.

 They have prepared a bed for you.

 The Latin words in bold type are all in the dative case.

 Amicus omnibus amicus nemini. A friend to everyone is a friend to no one.

 W

 Here is a table showing the groups of nouns and cases, including the dative:

 Notes

 1. In each declension dative and ablative plurals have the same endings.

 2. The datives of the pronouns are as follows:

 Singular Plural

 The dative endings of the adjectives are:

 Be sure to learn the new dative forms thoroughly.

 Exercise 21a

 Translate the following sentence:

 Cornelius fabulam uxori narravit.

 Now reword the sentence to show that Cornelius told the story to each of the following in turn. (Remember that you must check the declension of each noun before you can produce the correct ending.):

 Septimus, Flavia, puellae, miles, pueri, raedarius, senatores, caupo, viatores.

 Exercise 21b

 The sentence Eucleides mandata servis dabat can be translated Eucleides was giving orders to the slaves. or

 Eucleides was giving the slaves orders.

 Translate each of the following sentences in two ways:

 1. Patruus pecuniam pueris dat.

 2. Mater fabulam puellae narravit.

 3. Oratores fabulas civibus narraverunt.

 4. Ancilla invita cauponi cibum tradit.

 5. Caupones raro cenam senatoribus dant. raro, seldom

 6. Omnia patri meo semper dico.

 7. Nihil legato principis dixit.

 Note

 The dative case is also found with licet and appropinquare, e.g.:

 Mihi licet exire.

 Urbi appropinquabant.

 Exercise 21c

 Read aloud and translate:

 It is permissible for me to go out.

 I am allowed to go out. I may go out.

 They were coming near to the city. They were approaching the city.

 A

 $

 \J>..

 1. Matres liberorum multa els dicunt.

 2. Davus Cornelii mandata servis dedit _ ^ "V \,

 3. Cornelii mox urbis portis Appropinquabant.

 4. Cornelius epistulam ad Titum misit et omnia ei explicavit.

 5. Pueris non licebat solis per vias errare.

 6. Marcus, “Tace, Sexte!” inquit. “Nobis non licet hic clamare.”

 7. Dum Cornelii urbi appropinquabant, Titus omnia eis parabat.

 ve*

 Building Up the Meaning IV

 NOUNS: Dative or Ablative?

 You will have noticed that the dative and ablative cases often have identical endings, e.g., servo, puellis, militibus. How are you to tell which case is used in a particular sentence? The Latin will usually provide clues to help you decide correctly:

 a. Is the noun preceded by a preposition? If it is, the noun will be in the ablative case because no preposition governs the dative case.

 b. If there is no preposition, does the noun refer to a person ? If it does, it will normally be in the dative because nouns referring to persons are usually governed by a preposition if they are in the ablative. If the noun refers to a thing , it is more likely to be ablative than dative.

 Consider the following sentences, noting the clues provided by each word and group of words as you meet them:

 1. Canem nostrum puero dedit.

 The words canem nostrum are obviously accusative. When we reach puero, knowing that puer refers to a person, we can say that it must be in the dative case because it would be governed by a preposition if it was in the ablative case. A Roman reading as far as puero would have known before he reached the verb that someone was transferring “our dog” in some way or other “to the boy.”

 2. Puero canem nostrum dedimus.

 The fact that puero comes first in the sentence does not alter the reasoning. Since it refers to a person and is not governed by a preposition, it must be in the dative case and, again, some transfer is taking place.

 3. Canem nostrum baculo verberat.

 When we come to baculo, knowing that baculum refers to a thing, we can be sure because of the sense that it is in the ablative case. A Roman would have understood as soon as he reached baculo that someone was “doing” something to our dog with a stick.

 4. Baculo canem nostrum verberat.

 Again, the fact that baculo appears as the first word makes no difference. We again know that baculo must be in the ablative case because it refers to a thing, and when we come to canem we know that someone is “doing” something to our dog with a stick.

 LookcarefulLy^forfhe type of clue mentioned in the preceding discussion to help you with the words which could be dative or ablative. Identify each as dative or ablative and then translate the entire sentence.

 1 .

 2 .

 3 .

 4 .

 5 .

 ”67

 7 .

 8 . 9 . 10 . 11 . 12 .

 13 .

 14 .

 15 .

 Caupo viatoribus cibum dedit.

 Servus murem baculo necavit.

 Raedarius equos habenis devertebat.

 Amico captivi aurum tradidi.

 Puellae lupum virgis repellunt.

 Necesse erat pecuniam praedonibus tradere.

 Pueri pontem in rivo ramis faciebant.

 Epistulas principis tabellariis dedisti.

 Auriga habenas manibus arripuit.

 Senator filiis fabulas narrat.

 Servus nomina virorum domino dixit.

 Boves clamoribus incitamus.

 Vllicus bovem e rivo manibus extraxit.

 Frater meus captivos auro adiuvit.

 Mercatores togas et tunicas civibus monstrant.

 captivus, -I ( m ), captive aurum, -I (n), gold pecunia, -ae (f), money praedo, praedonis (m), robber pons, pontis (m), bridge mercator, mercatoris (m), merchant monstro (1), to show

 Sepulchral Inscriptions

 I

 I

 Caeciliae

 Q. Cretici f(lliae)

 Metellae Crassi

 (the tomb) of Caecilia Metella, daughter of Q(uintus Caecilius Metellus) Creticus, (wife) of Crassus

 II

 D. M. S. CRISPINAE CONIUGI DIVINAE, NUTRICI SENATORUM DUUM, ALBUS CONIUNX, C. Q. F. AN. XVII, H. VIX. AN. XXX M. II.B. M. F.

 D(Is) m(anibus) s(acrum) Crisplnae coniugl divinae, nutrici senatorum du(6r)um, Albus coniunx, c(um) q(uo) ffellciter) an(nos) XVII (vlxit), h(oc monumentum fecit). Vlx(it) an(nos) XXX m(enses) II. B(ene) m(erentl) f(ecit).

 Sacred to the deified spirits of Crispina, divine wife, nurse of two senators; Albus her husband, with whom she lived happily seventeen years, (set up this monument). She lived thirty years , two months. He made (this for her) who well deserved it.

 Ill

 D(Is) M(anibus) Iuliae Velvae pietissimae. Vixit an(nos) L. Aurel(ius) Mercurialis her(es) faciundum curavit. Vivus sibi et suis fecit.

 To the deified spirits of Julia Velva, a most dutiful woman. She lived 50 years. Aurelius Mercurialis, her heir, had this (tomb) made. He made it for himself and his family while he was still alive.

 Word Study VI

 The Supine Stem

 The stem of the supine (fourth principal part) of a Latin verb may be the source of other Latin words and English derivatives. This stem is found by dropping the -um from the supine, e.g., the supine stem of visum is vis-. Here are some common types of words formed from the supine stem:

 1. No suffix.

 The supine stem may form an English word with no change: invent (inventum) fact (factum)

 2. Silent -e.

 An English word may be formed by adding silent -e to the supine stem: narrate (narratum) finite (finitum)

 3. Suffix -or.

 When added to the supine stem, the Latin suffix -or creates a 3rd declension, masculine noun, which means “one who does” the action of the verb. These nouns are often borrowed into English with no change in spelling, although there is sometimes a change in meaning:

 Supine

 Latin Noun & Meaning English Word

 narratum (narrare) spectatum (spectare) actum (agere)

 narrator, narratoris (m), story-teller

 spectator, spectatoris (m), onlooker , observer actor, actoris (m), driver , doer , actor

 narrator

 spectator

 actor

 4. Suffix -io.

 The Latin suffix -io, when added to the supine stem, forms a 3rd declension, feminine noun, which means the “act of,” “state of,” or “result of” the action of the verb. The genitive singular of these nouns ends in -ionis, and the base has -ion-, which is the source of English words ending in -sion and -tion. The meaning of the English word is similar or identical to that of the Latin noun, which takes its meaning from the Latin verb:

 Supine

 visum (videre)

 Latin Noun & Meaning

 visio, visionis ( f), act of viewing

 narratum (narrare) narratio, narrationis ( f),

 act of telling (a story)

 English Word vision

 narration

 Note that whether the English word ends in -sion or -tion depends on whether the supine from which it is derived ends in -sum or -turn.

 Exercise 1

 Using the above information, give a 3rd declension Latin noun and an English derivative for each of the following supines. Check in a Latin dictionary to verify the existence of each noun and compare its meaning with that of its English derivative.

 1. auditum (audire) 4. factum (facere) 7. petitum (petere)

 2. cautum (cavere) 5. mansum (manere) 8. positum (ponere)

 3. exclamatum (exclamare) 6. missum (mittere) 9. statum (stare)

 Exercise 2

 Give the meaning of each English word below. Then give the supine, infinitive, and the meaning of the verb from which the English word is derived.

 1. apparition 4. habitation 7. session

 2. cogitate 5. inventor 8. state

 3. diction 6. motor 9. tacit

 Latin Expressions in English

 Latin phrases and expressions are often used in English. Some are very familiar, such as et cetera (etc.), and the rest. Others are more specialized, such as ipso facto, by the fact itself, a legal expression used to describe an assumption that has obvious truth, e.g., “A slave, ipso facto, had no right to vote.”

 While Latin expressions may sometimes be used in English as mere affectations, there are occasions when they are very effective in summarizing an idea succinctly. For example, the term de facto segregation refers to a long history of racial segregation which occurred in fact , even though no legal measures were taken to achieve it. De jure segregation, on the other hand, was achieved by law. These two Latin phrases capsulize these notions in a minimum of words, thereby making communication more efficient.

 Exercise 3

 Look up the following Latin expressions in an English dictionary. Use each expression in a sentence which illustrates its special use in English.

 4. non sequitur

 5. per capita

 6. per se

 7. quid pro quo

 8. sine qua non

 9. status quo

 1. ad hoc

 2. ad infinitum

 3. modus operandi

 At the Porta Capena

 Interea Titus, patruus Marci et Corneliae, eos prope Portam Capenam exspectabat. Cives, mercatores, servi per portam ibant atque huc illuc currebant. Titus tamen in lectica sedebat. Ubi Cornelios conspexit, e lectica descendit. E raeda descenderunt Cornelii. Interdiu enim raedas intra urbem agere Romanis non licebat. 5

 Stupuit Sextus ubi multitOdinem civium, servorum turbam vidit. Undique erat strepitus plaustrorum, undique clamor mercatorum, viatorum, raedariorum.

 Titus Cornelium et Aureliam et liberos maximo cum gaudio salutavit. “Quam laetus,” inquit, “vos omnes excipio! Nonne estitfAtinem defessi?” 10 “Valde defessi,” respondit Cornelius. “Mihi necesse e^t-ceLerifer ad Curiam Ire, sed primum Aureliam et Corneliam domum ducam.”

 “Ita vero!” inquit Titus. “Ecce! Lecticarii, quos vobis conduxi, vos domum ferent. Ego pueros curabo. Multa et mira videbunt pueri, atque ego omnia eis explicabo.” 15

 Itaque per vias urbis lecticarii patrem, matrem, filiam celeriter domum tulerunt. Postquam eo advenerunt, Aurelia et Cornelia, itinere defessae, se quieti dederunt. Cornelius tamen se lavit, togam puram induit, iterum in lectica consedit.

 “Ad Curiam celeriter!” inquit.

 huc illuc, this way and that lectica, -ae ( f), litter interdiu, during the day stupeo (2), to be amazed, gape turba, -ae ( f ), crowd, mob undique, on all sides strepitus, noise, clattering maximo cum gaudio, with very great joy

 Curia, -ae ( f ), Senate House

 20

 primum, first

 domum, homeward, home

 ducam, I will take

 ferent, (they) will carry

 curabo, I will take care of

 multa et mlra, many wonderful things C a ^

 videbunt, (they) will see

 eo, there, to that place

 quies, quietis ( f), rest

 purus, -a, -um, clean

 50

 curro, currere (3), cucurri, cursum, to run sedeo, sedere (2), sedi, sessum, to sit

 descendo, descendere (3), descendi, descensum, to climb down

 ago, agere (3), egi, actum, to do, drive

 conduco, conducere (3), conduxi, conductum, to hire

 fero, ferre, tuli, latum, to carry, bring, bear

 induo, induere (3), indui, indutum, to put on

 consido, considere (3), consedi, to sit down

 Slaves carrying a lectica.

 Exercise 22a

 Responde Latine :

 1. Quis Cornelios prope Portam Capenam exspectabat?

 2. Qui huc illuc currebant per portam?

 3. Ubi sedebat Titus?

 4. Cur Cornelii e raeda descenderunt?

 5. Quid Sextus prope portam vidit et audivit?

 6. Quomodo Titus Cornelios salutavit?

 7. Suntne Cornelii itinere defessi?

 8. Quo necesse est Cornelio Ire?

 9. Quis lecticarios conduxit?

 10. Quis pueris multa et mira explicabit? v

 11. Quid fecit Cornelius postquam domum Cornelii advenerunt?

 VERBS: Future Tense I

 Look at these sentences:

 Ego omnia els explicabo.

 Multa et mira videbunt pueri.

 Ego Corneliam domum ducam. Brevi tempore ad Portam Capenam adveniemus.

 I will explain everything to them. The boys will see many wonderful things.

 I will take Cornelia home.

 In a short time we will arrive at the Porta Capena.

 The words in bold type are examples of the future tense. The endings of the future tense are shown in the table below:

 Note that in the future tense the endings of verbs in the 3rd and 4th conjugations are quite different from the endings of verbs in the 1st and 2nd conjugations.

 Note also that the e of the ending in the 3rd and 4th conjugations is short before final -t and -nt.

 Learn the forms of the future tense, as follows:

 Exercise 22b

 Read aloud and translate:

 1. Titus nos pr ^ortam Capenam exspectabit; omnes maximo cum gaudio

 salutabit.

 2. Hodie sepulcra magna Romanorum praeclarorum vidimus; cras Curiam et alia aedificia Romana videbimus.

 3. Fortasse patruus noster nos ad Curiam ducet.

 4. Cornelii omnes se parant; brevi tempore ad urbem iter facient.

 5. Multa et mira vident pueri; lecticarii eos mox domum portabunt.

 6. Cornelius e raeda descendet, nam raedam intra urbem agere non licet.

 7. Quam diu in urbe manebis, pater?

 8. Bene dormietis, pueri. Longum enim iter hodie fecistis.

 9. Cornelia, itinere longo defessa, se quieti dabit.

 10. Pueri multa rogabunt de aedificiis quae in urbis viis videbunt.

 11. Cras, ubi surgetis, pueri, strepitum plaustrorum audietis.

 12. Titus, ubi pueros domum ducet, omnia eis explicabit.

 are in the future tense. English, however, requires the present tense here.

 Exercise 22c

 Add one of the following adverbs to each sentence , according to the tense of the verb: hodie (present ), heri (perfect), or eras (future). Read aloud and translate:

 1. Milites ad urbem 0 v ^ veniunt.

 2. Pueros parentes ad cubiculum ^ ' miserunt.

 3. Multi homines in via — stabunt.

 4. Lecticarii ad portam C ^ Q venient.

 5. Multae matres liberos Kjl '< expectaverunt.

 6. Senatores milites l ' conspiciunt.

 7. Aedificia multa i ' vidimus.

 8. Cur non cauponem petemus?

 9. Nos omnes in raeda - ^ sedemus.

 10. Vos in lectis L dormietis.

 maneo, manere (2), mansi, mansum, to remain, stay facio, facere (3), feci, factum, to make, do

 Note that in sentences 11 and 12 the verbs in the clauses introduced by ubi

 Exercise 22 d

 Take parts , read aloud , and translate:

 Interea Eucleides et pueri cum Tito extra Portam Capenam stabant.

 TITUS:

 SEXTUS:

 MARCUS:

 SEXTUS:

 MARCUS:

 SEXTUS:

 MARCUS:

 TITUS:

 SEXTUS:

 MARCUS:

 SEXTUS:

 TITUS:

 Salvete, pueri! Quid in itinere vidistis? Vldistisne rusticos in agris? Agrosne colebant?

 Rusticos vidimus. Agros non colebant, sed sub arboribus quiescebant.

 At cauponam vidimus; nostra raeda in fossa haerebat et nobis necesse 5 erat in caupona pernoctare.

 Ita vero! Gaudebam quod pater meus in illa caupona pernoctare constituit. Caupo erat vir Graecus, amicus Eucleidis.

 Ego quoque gaudebam, nam miles bonam fabulam nobis narravit. In illa fabula caupo quidam hospitem necavit. Tales fabulas amo. 10

 Sed quid nunc faciemus, patrue? Ego volo Curiam et Forum videre. Quando Circum Maximum visitabimus? Ecce! Nonne Circum Maximum supra muros urbis exstantem videre possum?

 Ita vero! Est Circus Maximus. Non procul abest.

 Non possumus omnia hodie videre. Cras satis temporis habebimus. 15 Sed quid est illud aedificium? Nonne pontem ingentem supra portam video?

 Non pontem hic vides, O stulte! Est aquaeductus, Aqua Marcia. Per illum aquaeductum Romani aquam in urbem ferunt. Cave imbrem, Sexte! 20

 Sed non pluit.

 Semper hic pluit, Sexte. Rimosa enim est Aqua Marcia.

 extra (+ acc .), outside at, but

 talis, -is, -e, such Circus Maximus, a stadium in Rome

 maximus, -a, -um, very great, greatest, very large supra (+ acc .), above

 murus, -I ( m ), wall

 exstantem, standing out, towering satis temporis, enough time stultus, -a, -um, stupid aqua, -ae (f), water Cave imbrem! Watch out for the rain!

 rimosus, -a, -um, full of cracks, leaky

 colo, colere (3), colui, cultum, to cultivate quiesco, quiescere (3), quievi, quietum, to rest, keep quiet constituo, constituere (3), constitui, constitutum, to decide pluit, pluere (3), pluit, it rains (usually found only in 3rd person singular and infinitive)

 Exercise 22e

 Give the appropriate form of the future tense for each verb in parentheses:

 1. Nos in Via Appia non (pernoctare).

 2. Mox vos urbi (appropinquare) et patruum (conspicere).

 3. Titus multas fabulas de aedificiis Romae pueris (narrare).

 4. Ego primum Aureliam et Corneliam domum (ducere).

 5. Pueri multa et mira in urbe cras (videre).

 6. Quando Cornelius ad Curiam (venire)?

 7. Tu cenam bonam in illa caupona (habere).

 8. Nos in lectis sordidis non (dormire).

 9. Cras Marcus et Sextus mane (surgere).

 10. Cornelius Titum fratrem (petere); mox eum (invenire).

 The Seven Hills of Rome

 Aqueducts

 One feature of the city which the Cornelii would notice as they approached Rome was the evidence of the Romans’ passion for water. Abundant water for baths and fountains and lakes was an utter necessity to the Roman, so that it had to be brought in by the aqueducts whose arches strode into Rome from all directions. By A.D. 80, nine aqueducts were in use, carrying water across the plain to Rome from sources up to fifty-six miles or ninety kilometers distant.

 The illustration shows the arches supporting the water-channel and a cross-section of the channel itself. To maintain the downhill flow, experts recommended a fall of six inches or fifteen centimeters in every ninety-eight feet or thirty meters. Tunnels, with inspection shafts built into them, were driven through hills which it was impossible to by-pass. Sometimes, by using the principle that water rises to its own level, a U-shaped arrangement of the tunnel allowed an uphill flow. Responsibility for maintaining and cleaning the whole vast system rested with the curator aquarum and his staff.

 The first aqueduct, the Aqua Appia, went underground. Since a gravity system was employed, later ones had to be higher to serve the hillier districts of the town. The Romans then hit on the idea of using arches to support the water-channel. The arches turned out to be beautiful structures in themselves, but the Romans had adopted them for quite different reasons. They stood up better to earthquakes, always a hazard in Italy; the wind could blow through them, where a solid wall would invite disaster; and they could be easily repaired, as workmen could take the building materials from one side to the other.

 Admiring comments about the aqueducts abound from native and foreigner alike. “Just as impressive/' says one writer, “as the pyramids, but how much more useful!" Not only so, but we also have an astonishing book, De aquis urbis Romae , by Frontinus, Superintendent of Aqueducts, written about A. D. 97, describing the system in detail and the difficulties of organizing and maintaining it. He reports that, through bribery of watermen, supplies were sometimes diverted into private estates and never reached Rome at all. Householders in Rome itself often succeeded in bribing inspectors (who were, after all, slaves) to replace a narrow pipe by one of wider bore, while they continued to pay at the old rate!

 According to the latest available figures, the daily consumption of water in a large city today is about 120 gallons or 455 liters per person. According to Frontinus, in his day the Roman aqueducts could deliver over 264 million gallons or one billion liters in twenty-four hours, providing a daily allowance of about 240 gallons or 900 liters per person! The aqueducts leaked dreadfully, as the Cornelii found at the Porta Capena, and what with water thieves and corrupt inspectors, all this water did not actually reach Rome. For all that, the Roman citizen still had a lot of water at his disposal. Did he use it all? The answer is “Yes,” because as one Roman writer put it, ‘The waters, having provided the city with the life-giving element, passed on into the sewers.” The Roman, you see, hardly ever turned the tap off. For him, running water was simply running water!

 A Roman Contemplates the Aqueducts

 We must now describe marvels which are unsurpassed for their genuine value. Quintus Marcius Rex (praetor 144-143 B.C.), having been ordered by the senate to repair the channels of the Aqua Appia (the earliest aqueduct, built by Appius Claudius Caecus in 312 B.C.), the Anio Vetus (begun in 272 B.C.), and the Tepula, drove underground passages through the mountains and brought to Rome a new water-supply named after himself (the Aqua Marcia) and completed within the period of his praetorship.

 Agrippa, moreover, as aedile added to these the Aqua Virgo (completed in 19 b.c.), repaired the channels of the others and put them in order, and constructed 700 basins, not to speak of 500 fountains and 130 reservoirs for distribution of water, many of the latter being richly decorated. On these works he erected 300 bronze or marble statues and 400 marble pillars marking the course taken by the channels. All of this he did in a year. In the memoirs of his aedileship he adds that in celebration of these achievements games lasting 59 days were held and that the bathing establishments were opened to the public free of charge—all 170 of them, a number which at Rome has now been infinitely increased.

 All of these previous aqueducts have been surpassed by the most recent and very costly work inaugurated by the Emperor Gaius (a.d. 37-41) and completed by Claudius (a.d. 41-54), who made the Curtian and Caerulean Springs and the Anio Novus flow into Rome from the 40th milestone at such a high level as to supply water to all the seven hills of the city. 350,000,000 sesterces were spent on this work.

 If we carefully consider the abundant supplies of water in public buildings, baths, pools, open channels, private houses, gardens, and country estates near the city; if we consider the distances traversed by the water before it arrives, the raising of arches, the tunneling of mountains, and the building of level routes across deep valleys, we shall readily admit that there has never been anything more remarkable in the whole world.

 Pliny, Natural History XXXVI. 121-123

 VERBS: Future Tense II

 'TT'

 The following are the future tenses of the irregular verbs you have met:

 Note that velle, nolle, ire, and ferre have future tense endings like those of regular verbs. Note also where long vowels occur in the endings of these verbs.

 Exercise 22f

 Read aloud and translate:

 1. Ibisne ad Curiam, pater? Ita vero! Ad Curiam celeriter ibo.

 2. Quando domum redibis, pater? Nescio.

 3. Fortasse Cornelius domum redire brevi tempore poterit.

 4. Eucleides ad amphitheatrum Ire nolet.

 5. Necesse erit diu in urbe manere.

 6. Nocte vehicula magna onera in urbe ferent.

 7. Pueri Circum Maximum cras videre volent.

 8. Ubi liberi mane erunt? Tu liberos non videbis, nam domo mox exibunt.

 9. Si equi strenue laborabunt, raedam e fossa extrahere poterunt.

 10. Si pluet, ad silvam ambulare nolam.

 11. Feresne cistam meam in cauponam? Minime! Tu ipse eam fer!

 12. Redlbitisne ad villam rusticam? Fortasse redire poterimus.

 13. Voletisne cras ad Circum Maximum Ire? Ita vero! Cras illuc Ire volemus.

 14. “Ego Ire nolam," inquit Aurelia.

 15. Post cenam pueri cubitum Ire nolent.

 domo, out of the house

 exeo, exire ( irreg .), exii, exitum, to go out

 Note that in sentences 9 and 10 the verbs in the clauses introduced by si are in the future tense. English, however, requires the present tense here.

 Always Tomorrow

 Simulae Titus et pueri et Eucleides urbem per Portam Capenam intraverunt, clamavit Sextus, “Quid nos primum faciemus? Quo ibimus? Vlsi-tabimusne — ?"

 “Quo tu nos duces, patrue?" interpellavit Marcus. “Videbimusne Curiam et Forum?" 5

 Titus, “Tacete! Tacete!" inquit. “Forum cras visitabimus. Cras, Eucleides, tibi licebit pueros eo ducere. Tum erit satis temporis. Hodie tamen, pueri, vos domum per urbem ducam et omnia in itinere vobis demonstrabo."

 Iam advenerant ad Circum Maximum, qui non procul aberat. Stupuit Sextus ubi molem Circi Maximi vidit. Stupuit quoque Marcus, quamquam 10 Circum antea viderat. Stupuit Titus, attonitus non mole, sed silentio Circi.

 “Eheu! Eheu!" inquit Titus. “Hodie Circus est clausus. Tribus diebus tamen princeps ipse ludos magnificos faciet."

 “Nonne tu nos eo duces?" rogavit Marcus.

 “Eheu! Ego non potero vos ducere," inquit Titus. “Fortasse Eucleides 15 vos ducet."

 “Minime!" respondit Sextus. “Libros, non ludos amat Eucleides."

 “Agite, pueri!" interpellavit Titus. “Nunc circumibimus Montem Palatinum et Forum intrabimus ad arcum Tiberii. Ibi fortasse patri tuo occurremus, Marce. Mox senatores e Curia exibunt." 20

 Itaque Circum reliquerunt et Palatinum circumierunt. Titus in itinere monstravit pueris mira aedificia quae principes in Palatino aedificaverant. Tandem ad arcum Tiberii advenerunt, iam labore et aestu defessi.

 “Hic est arcus," inquit Titus, “quem — "

 “Omnia videre poteritis cras," interpellavit Cornelius, qui eo ipso tempore 25 ad arcum e Curia advenerat. “Eucleides omnia vobis explicabit. Iam sero est. Agite! Iam domum ibimus."

 simulae, as soon as advenerant, they had arrived moles, molis (f), mass, huge bulk viderat, he had seen attonitus, -a, -um, astonished, astounded

 clausus, -a, -um, closed ludl, -orum (m pi), games

 liber, librl (m), book Mons Palatinus, Montis Palatini (m), the Palatine Hill arcus, arch aedifico (1), to build aestu, by the heat quern ( acc .), which

 60

 licet, licere (2), licuit, it is allowed (usually found only in 3rd person singular and infinitive)

 possum, posse ( irreg .), potul, to be able

 circumeo, circumire, circumii, circumitum, to go around

 occurro, occurrere (3), occurri, occursum (+ dat.), to meet, encounter

 relinquo, relinquere (3), reliqui, relictum, to leave

 Tantae molis erat Romanam condere gentem! It was such a vast undertaking to found the Roman nationi (Vergil, A eneid 1.33)

 Curiam et continens el Chalcidicum . . . feci. I built the Curia and the Chalcidicum next to it. (Augustus, Res gestae XIX)

 i

 Arcus Tiberll

 -pcLsiliccL. MmiliO'

 Exercise 23a

 Responde Latine:

 ‘

 2 .

 6 .

 7 .

 8 .

 9 .

 10 . 11 . 12 .

 13 .

 14 .

 15 .

 Quid facere volebant Sextus et Marcus postquam urbem intraverunt? Quis pueros cras ad Forum ducet?

 Quid Titus hodie facere vult?

 Vlderatne Sextus antea Circum Maximum?

 Stupuitne Marcus ubi Circum Maximum vidit?

 Eratne Titus attonitus mole Circi?

 Cur Circum hodie pueri non intrant?

 Quid faciet princeps tribus diebus?

 Ducetne Titus pueros ad ludos?

 Quid amat Eucleides?

 Ubi occurrent pueri Cornelio?

 Qui mira aedificia in Palatino aedificaverant?

 Defesslne pueri ad arcum Tiberii advenerunt?

 Quis pueris prope arcum Tiberii occurrit?

 Quo Cornelius pueros hodie ducet?

 Roman Magistrates and Lictors; an oil painting by jean Lemaire (1598-1659). Montreal Museum of Fine Arts.

 62

 VERBS: Pluperfect Tense

 Look at these sentences:

 lam advenerant ad Circum.

 Circum antea viderat.

 Mira aedificia aedificaverant.

 The verbs in these sentences are all in the pluperfect tense, which can nearly always be translated into English by the word “had.”

 The endings of the pluperfect tense are the same for all Latin verbs:

 These endings are added to the perfect stem, which is found by dropping the I from the end of the third principal part, e.g., reliqui, stem rellqu-.

 C\ W cf

 They had already reached the Circus. He had seen the Circus before.

 They had built marvelous buildings.

 Exercise 23b

 Read aloud and translate:

 1. Eucleides pueros ad urbem duxerat et omnia els demonstraverat.

 2. Aurelia sollicita erat quod servi cenam nondum paraverant.

 3. Hodie librum diu legebam quem mihi heri dedisti.

 4. Defessus eram quod multas epistulas iam scripseram.

 5. Vix domum adveneratis, pueri, cum Eucleides in hortum intravit.

 scribo, scribere (3), scripsi, scriptum, to write vix, scarcely

 Exercise 23c

 Substitute the corresponding pluperfect form for each verb in parentheses, read the sentence aloud, and translate:

 Tantum sonitum numquam antea (audimus)

 arcus laetus fuit quod patri prope Curiam (occurrit) 

 erat plena hominum qui ad urbem (veniunt) 

 ficarii, qui Cornelium per urbis vias (ferunt) , extra Curiam

 euln exspectabant.

 5. Titus, quod Circum (invenit) clausum, pueros domum ducebat.

 tantus, -a, -um, so great, such a big sonitus, sound

 Building Up the Meaning V

 VERBS: Present or Future?

 Look at these sentences:

 Cornelius multos servos habet. Scelestos servos ad vlllam mittet. Hodie in caupona manemus. Cras Romam adveniemus.

 Cornelius has many slaves.

 He will send the wicked slaves to the farm. Today we remain in the inn.

 Tomorrow we will reach Rome.

 The endings -es, -et, -emus, -etis, -ent can denote the present tense of verbs of the 2nd conjugation or the future tense of verbs of the 3rd and 4th conjugations. If there is an i before the e, the verb will be the future tense of a 3rd conjugation -io verb or the future tense of a 4th conjugation verb.

 Exercise 23d

 Following the examples, identify the remainder of the verb forms below:

 Exercise 23e

 Look carefully at the verbs in the following sentences. Decide the conjugation number first (this will help you to get the tense right) and then read aloud and translate:

 1 Puerl Eucleidem non vident, sed vocem eius audient.

 2. Videsne senatores in viis? Quando Cornelius veniet?

 3. Servi celeriter current, nam Cornelium timent.

 4. Sextus mane surget; in animo habet exire.

 5. Ego et Cornelia tacemus; patrem timemus.

 Versiculi: "Procrustes," pages 100-102.

 Review V

 Exercise Va

 Supply Latin words to match the English cues. Be sure to give the right

 endings. Read each sentence aloud and translate it.

 1. Sextus fabulam de caupone narrabat, (wicked) (to

 Cornelius)

 2. Eucleides mandata et dabat, (to the slaves) (to the

 slave-women)

 3. Cuncti Cornelii e venerunt, (the inn)

 4. Viatores non in cauponis bene cenare possunt, (all)

 5. Raedarius habenis verberavit, (the horses)

 6. Sextus de narravit, (every-

 thing) (the dead mouse) (to Marcus)

 7. Dum Cornelius fabulam narrat, appropinquave-

 runt. (to his wife) (the city)

 8. Prope viam sunt sepulcra (of

 many famous Romans)

 9. Titus prope Portam Capenam exspectabat, (them)

 10. Interdiu raedas intra urbem agere non licebat, (to or for them)

 11. “Quam laetus video!” exclamat Titus, (all of

 you = you all)

 12. “ sumus valde defessi,” respondet Cornelius. (We)

 13. “ necesse est ad Curiam Ire.” (For me)

 14. Titus respondet, “ lecticarios conduxi.” (For you)

 15. “Ego multa et mira et explicabo,” inquit Titus, (to

 you) (to Sextus)

 16. Postquam domum advenit, Cornelius lavit. (himself)

 17. “ in caupona pernoctare necesse erat,” inquit Sextus. (For us)

 18. Sextus supra portam videt, (a huge aqueduct)

 19. Cras Forum visitare licebit, (to or for the boys)

 20. Hodie dormire licet, (to or for Cornelia)

 21. diebus princeps ludos faciet. (In three) (for the

 Romans)

 22. Titus Marcum et Sextum ducet. (To them, i.e.,

 the games)

 23. Cornelius e Curia mox exibit. Marcus et Sextus occurrent.

 (Him)

 24. Titus mira aedificia monstravit, (to the boys)

 25. Cras multa alia aedificia monstrabit, (to them)

 Exercise Vb

 Give the requested forms of the following verbs in the present, imperfect, future, perfect, and pluperfect tenses:

 Present Imperfect Future Perfect Pluperfe

 1. circumire (3rd pi.) 

 2. descendere (2nd sing.) 

 3. ferre (2nd pi.) 

 4. dare (1st pi.) 

 5. esse (3rd sing.) 

 6. respondere (1st sing.) 

 7. surgere (3rd pi.) 

 8. cogitare (2nd sing.) 

 9. conicere (1st sing.) 

 10. venire (1st pi.) 

 Exercise Vc

 Read the following passage and answer the questions below with full sentences in Latin:

 Cornelius, postquam in triclinium intravit, Corneliam vidit. Cornelia picturam, quae in muro erat, spectabat.

 “Quid tu facis, mea filia?” inquit Cornelius.

 " Cui Cornelia, “Hanc picturam valde amo, pater. Nonne hic vir est Hercules? Eucleides nobis multa de Hercule dixit, sed ego omnia audire volo.”

 Respondit Cornelius, “Hercules, ut bene scis, erat vir Graecus. Olim, ubi Infans erat et in lecto dormiebat, subito duo serpentes lecto appropinquaverunt et Herculem dormientem necare volebant. Sed Hercules, e somno excitatus, serpentes solus strangulavit.”

 Cornelia tamen rogavit, “Sed cur in pictura est canis triformis? Cur Hercules hunc canem trahit?”

 Ei respondit Cornelius, “Hercules, quod demens filios suos olim necaverat, miser erat et se punire constituit. Itaque factus est servus domini cuiusdam scelesti qui eum valde timebat et multos labores perficere iussit. Ille canis, quem in pictura vides, est Cerberus qui portas inferorum custodit. In hac pictura Hercules ex Inferis ducit Cerberum invitum. Dominus enim Herculis eum in Inferos descendere iusserat, quod ita cogitabat: ‘Hercules numquam ex Inferis redibit. Cerberus certe eum necabit.’ Sed tandem exiit ex Inferis Hercules cum cane, nam omnia perficere solebat. Itaque dominus perterritus Herculem canem ad Inferos statim reducere iussit.”

 At iam Cornelia et pater vocem Aureliae audiverunt. “Eheu!” clamavit Cornelia. “Mater nos vocat. Mox erit cenae tempus.”

 5

 10

 15

 20

 “Ita vero!” respondit Cornelius. “Senatores quidam apud nos cenabunt. Necesse est mihi matrem tuam consulere. Cras tamen de aliis Herculis laboribus tibi narrabo.” 25

 triclinium, -I (n), dining room ut bene scis, as you know well excitatus, -a, -um, wakened, aroused

 triformis, -is, -e, three-headed demens, in a fit of madness

 factus est, became cuiusdam, genitive of quidam Inferi, -drum, (m pi), the underworld

 apud nos, at our home

 perficio, perficere (3), perfeci, perfectus, to accomplish

 1. What does Cornelia love?

 2. What does Cornelia want to hear?

 3. What did the snakes do?

 4. What is Hercules doing with the dog in the picture?

 5. Why did Hercules decide to punish himself?

 6. Who is Cerberus?

 7. Why did the master order Hercules to descend into the underworld?

 8. What did the master do when Hercules brought Cerberus to him?

 9. Why does Cornelius have to consult with Aurelia?

 10. When will Cornelia hear about other labors of Hercules?

 Exercise Vd

 1. In the passage above, locate in sequence all of the verbs in the imperfect, perfect, pluperfect, and future tenses and translate them.

 2. Locate all of the words in the dative case and translate the sentences in which they occur.

 First Morning in Rome

 lam dies erat. Magnus erat clamor in urbe. Iam canes in viis latrabant, iam homines clamabant et per vias currebant. Servi ad Forum magno tumultu onera ferebant. Undique clamor et strepitus! Sed nihil clamoris, nihil strepitus ad Marcum pervenit. Neque clamores hominum neque latratus canum eum excitaverant. In lecto stertebat nam defessus erat. 5

 Sextus quoque in lecto manebat sed dormire non poterat. Numquam antea urbem tantam visitaverat. Clamoribus et strepitu excitatus, iam cogitabat de omnibus rebus quas Titus heri narraverat. “Quid hodie videbimus? Fortasse cum Tito ibimus qui omnia nobis demonstrabit. Corneliusne nos in Forum ducet? Ego certe Forum et Curiam et senatores videre volo.” 10 Interea Eucleides, qui prima luce exierat, iam domum redierat. Statim cubiculum puerorum petivit et, “Eho, pueri!” inquit. “Cur nondum sur-rexistis? Abhinc duas horas ego surrexl. Quod novum librum emere volebam, in Argiletum mane descendi ad tabernam quandam ubi in postibus nomina multorum poetarum videre potes. Catullus, Flaccus—” 15

 At pueri celeriter interpellaverunt quod Eucleides, ut bene sciebant, semper aliquid novi docere volebat. “Quid in via vidisti?”

 Eucleides, “Nihil,” inquit, “nisi miserum hominem lapidibus oppressum. Boves lapides quadratos in plaustro trahebant ad novum aedificium quod Caesar prope Domum Auream aedificat. Illud aedificium est ingens 20 amphitheatrum et mox—”

 At pueri in cubiculo non iam manebant, nam Eucleides, qui erat semper verbosus, multa de aedificiis urbis narrare solebat; neque tamen pueri eum audire volebant.

 magno tumultu, with a great uproar excitatus, -a, -um, aroused de omnibus rebus, about all the things, about everything Eho! Hey!

 abhinc duas horas, two hours ago novus, -a, -um, new taberna, -ae ( f), shop ad tabernam quandam, to a certain shop

 postis, postis (m), door-post

 poeta, -ae (m), poet ut, as

 scio (4), to know aliquid, something lapis, lapidis (m), stone

 lapidibus oppressum, crushed by stones

 lapides quadrati, squared stones quod, which

 Domus Aurea, (Nero’s) Golden House neque tamen, but . . . not

 68

 pervenio, pervenire (4), perveni, perventum, to arrive (at), reach

 sterto, stertere (3), stertul, to snore

 redeo, redire ( irreg .), redii, reditum, to return, go back

 emo, emere (3), emi, emptum, to buy

 doceo, docere (2), docui, doctum, to teach

 traho, trahere, (3), traxi, tractum, to drag, pull

 NOUNS: 4th and 5th Declensions

 Most Latin nouns belong to the 1st, 2nd, or 3rd declensions. There are two other declensions to which a few nouns belong:

 Be sure to learn these forms thoroughly.

 Nouns of the 4th and 5th declensions will appear in vocabularies as follows:

 4 th Declension aestus, -us (m), heat aquaeductus, -us (m), aqueduct arcus, -us (m), arch domus, -us ( f ), house latratus, -us (m), barking manus, -us ( f ), hand rlsus, -us (m), smile, laugh sonitus, -us (m), sound strepitus, -us (m), noise, clattering tumultus, -us (m), uproar, commotion

 Sth Declension dies, -el (m), day

 res, rel ( f), thing, matter, situation

 Most 4th declension nouns are masculine; most 5th declension nouns are feminine.

 <pQ

 06

 U /

 ^ e

 Latin Phrases Used in English

 ante meridiem, before noon

 post meridiem, after noon

 per diem, a daily allowance for expenses

 in medias res, into the middle of things

 in situ, in its original place

 Exercise 24a

 Read aloud and translate:

 1. Media nocte tumultum magnum audivi. Quae erat causa huius tumultus? Magno cum strepitu boves plaustra per vias trahebant. Primum strepitus procul aberat; deinde in via nostra erat tumultus.

 huius, of this

 absum, abesse ( irreg .), afui, to be away, absent, be distant

 2. Multas res manibus nostris facimus. Eucleides manu stilum tenebat, nam pueros scribere docebat. Pueri arbores manibus et pedibus antea ascenderant. Manus igitur eorum sordidae erant. Eucleides eos iussit manus statim lavare.

 stilus, -I (m), pen eorum, their

 3. Abhinc multos dies illa domus incensa est. Itaque dominus, quod muri domus Infirmi erant, domum novam ibi aedificare constituit. Ille dominus est senator qui multas domus in urbe habet. Omnes eius domus sunt magnae, sed domus nova erit omnium maxima. In hac domo senator ipse habitabit.

 incensa est, was burned

 4. Multos dies in villa manebamus. Venit tamen dies reditus. Necesse erat iter septem dierum facere quod ad urbem celerrime redire volebamus. Eo die discessimus. Sex dies per Viam Appiam iter faciebamus. Septimo die Romam pervenimus.

 reditus, -us (m), return eo die, on that day

 discedo, discedere, (3), discessi, discessum, to go away, depart

 5. Titus rem miram nobis narravit. Servus, qui nocte per vias urbis ambulabat, subito fugit perterritus. Quae erat causa huius rei? In via occurrerat cani qui, ut ipse dixit, tria capita habebat. De talibus rebus in libris saepe legimus sed numquam talem rem ipsi vidimus. De hac re omnes cives multas fabulas narrant.

 caput, capitis (n), head

 fugio, fugere (3), fugi, fugitum, to flee

 lego, legere (3), legi, lectum, to read

 Selections from Catullus and Horace

 I

 Vivamus, mea Lesbia, atque amemus, rumoresque senum severiorum omnes unius aestimemus assis!

 Soles occidere et redire possunt; nobis cum semel occidit brevis lux, nox est perpetua una dormienda.

 Let us live , my Lesbia, and let us love,

 and let us value all the gossips of the stern old men

 as worth but a penny.

 The sun is able to set and rise again; for us when once our brief light has set, one eternal night must be slept.

 (Catullus, V. 1-6)

 II

 Tu ne quaesieris —scire nefas — quem mihi, quem tibi

 finem di dederint, Leuconoe, . . . Dum loquimur, fugerit invida

 aetas: carpe diem, quam minimum credula postero.

 Don't inquire — it's wrong to know—what length of life the gods have granted to you and to me, Leuconoe, . . . While we are talking, envious time has fled; seize the day, putting as little trust as possible in the future. (Horace, Odes 1.11-2 and 7-8)

 III

 Sunt quos curriculo pulverem Olympicum collegisse iuvat metaque fervidis evitata rotis palmaque nobilis terrarum dominos evehit ad deos.

 Some people take pleasure in gathering Olympic dust on the racetrack. When they narrowly avoid the turning posts with their hot wheels, the noble palm of victory exalts them as masters of the earth to the level of the gods. (Horace, Odes 1.1.3-6)

 Rome

 Impressions of Rome

 What nation is so far distant, Caesar, or so barbarous that it does not have a representative at the games here in your city? Here come farmers from the Balkans, natives of South Russia nurtured on horse’s blood, people from the banks of the Nile, as well as those from the Atlantic’s farthest shores. Here too are Arabs, men from Southern Turkey, German tribesmen, and Ethiopians—all so different in dress and in appearance. Their speech too sounds all different; yet it is all one when you are hailed, Caesar, as the true father of our country.

 Martial, De spectaculis III

 Caecilius, in your own eyes you are a polished gentleman, but take my word for it, you are not. What are you then? A clown! You are like the hawker from across the Tiber who trades pale brimstone matches for broken glass or the man who sells to the idle bystanders soggy pease-pudding; like the keeper and trainer of snakes or the cheap slaves of the salt-sellers; like the hoarse-voiced seller of smoking sausages with his hot trays or a third-class street poet.

 Martial, Epigrams 1.41

 If duty calls, the crowd gives way and the rich man is borne along rapidly over their heads by stout Liburnian bearers. On the way he will read, write, or sleep, for with the windows shut the litter induces sleep. Even so, he will get there before us. Though we hurry, the sea of humanity in front hinders us, and the great throng following jostles our backs. One man strikes us with his elbow, another with a hard pole; one knocks a beam against our heads, another a barrel. Our legs are plastered with mud, we are trampled on all sides by great feet, a soldier’s hob-nailed boot crushes my toe. Newly patched togas are torn. A tall fir tree sways as the wagon rumbles on. Other carts carry pine trees, a nodding menace over the heads of the crowd. If the cart carrying Ligurian stone tilts forward and pours its overturned pile on the crowds, what remains of their bodies?

 Juvenal, Satires III.239

 73

 The Streets of Rome

 Roman houses were neither named nor numbered. Hence the very complicated instructions given to those wishing to reach a certain “address”:

 Every time you meet me, Lupercus, you ask, “May I send a slave to fetch your book of poems? I’ll return it as soon as I’ve read it.” Lupercus, it’s not worth troubling your slave. It’s a long journey to the Pear Tree, and I live up three flights of steep stairs. You can find what you want closer to home.

 No doubt you often go down to the Argiletum. There’s a shop opposite Caesar’s Forum with both door-posts covered with advertisements so that you can in a moment read the names of all the poets. Look for me there.

 Martial, Epigrams 1.117

 SYRUS: I don’t know the man’s name, but I know where he lives.

 DEMEA: Then tell me where.

 SYRUS: Down here. You know the colonnade by the butcher’s?

 DEMEA: Of course I do.

 SYRUS: Go straight up the street that way; a bit along there’s a slope facing you;

 down there and after that, on this side here, there’s a shrine with an alley beside it.

 DEMEA: Where?

 SYRUS: Near where the big wild fig-tree grows.

 DEMEA: I’ve got it.

 SYRUS: Down there.

 DEMEA: But that’s a dead end!

 SYRUS: Ugh! What an idiot I am! I’ve made a mistake. Come right back to the

 colonnade again. Here’s a much quicker and more direct route. Do you know the house of rich Cratinus?

 DEMEA: Yes.

 SYRUS: Go past it, down a street to the left; turn right at Diana’s temple. Before

 you reach the gate, near the pool, there’s a bakery with a carpenter’s opposite. He’s there.

 Terence, Adelphi 571

 Domitian, who followed Titus as Emperor of Rome, issued an edict forbidding shopkeepers to display their wares on the streets. This, according to Martial, was a vast improvement:

 The aggressive shopkeepers had taken the whole city away from us and never kept to the limits of their thresholds. But you, Domitian, ordered our narrowed streets to expand and what had been but a path has now become a street. No longer do they chain wine bottles to the pillars in front of their shops, and no longer are officials forced to walk in the middle of the mud.

 No longer does the barber blindly draw his razor in a dense crowd, and no longer do the greasy fast-food shops take up the whole street. The barbers, bartenders, cooks, and butchers now keep to their own thresholds. Now Rome is a city again, whereas before it was just one big shop.

 Martial, Epigrams VII.61

 Columns and Porticos

 The column was one of the main features of Roman architecture. Sometimes a single column was used to support a statue; more often, columns were used to support the roofs or to form the entrance-porches of temples and other buildings.

 From the idea of the porch, there developed the portico or long covered walk which afforded the citizens protection from sun and dust, while allowing them to enjoy the fresh air. In the shelter of the portico various activities took place. The Portico of Minucius was used as a corn-exchange; in another a vegetable market was held. In the porticos philosophers lectured, poets recited, schoolmasters held their classes, lawyers met their clients, entertainers performed, snacks were sold, and business deals were concluded. In fact, porticos became so common that it was eventually possible to walk from one end of the city to the other without coming out into the open at all!

 According to one writer, porticos covered more than a quarter of the total area of the Campus Martius, the number of columns supporting them being about 2000. Halls built in the shelter of these housed wall-maps of Rome and the Roman world, exhibitions of wonders from the Far East, natural marvels such as a snake 23 yards or 21 meters long, and, in the Portico of Philippus, a display of wigs and the latest in ladies’ hairstyles.

 Exercise 24b

 Take parts, read aloud, and translate:

 SEXTUS: Quam defessus sum, Marce! Nam hodie mane dormire non poteram.

 ^ Tantus clamor in viis erat.

 MARCUS: Qualem clamorem audivisti? Ego certe nihil clamoris audivi.

 SEXTUS: Quid? Nonne audivisti illos canes in vili latrantes? Multas horas latra-

 bant. Numquam audivi tantum strepitum. Audivi etiam clamorem multorum hominum qui per vias currebant.

 MARCUS: Quid clamabant?

 SEXTUS: Id audire non poteram, nam omnes simul clamabant. Certe tamen Irati

 erant. Erat quoque strepitus plaustrorum. Nos in urbe heri plaustra non vidimus. Unde venerunt plaustra?

 MARCUS: Interdiu non licet plaustra intra urbem agere. Nocte igitur necesse est

 laborare. Servi in urbem ferebant cibum, vinum, lapides—

 SEXTUS: Cur lapides intra urbem tulerunt?

 MARCUS: Caesar constituit ingens amphitheatrum in urbe aedificare.

 SEXTUS: Nos illud aedificium vidimus?

 MARCUS: Heri illud conspexisti, ubi ad Forum cum patre meo descendebamus.

 Heri non satis temporis erat id Inspicere quod pater domum festinabat. Sed mox amphitheatrum iterum visitabimus atque id Inspiciemus. Fortasse Eucleides nos ducet.

 SEXTUS: Dum hoc mihi dicis, multi homines in domum venerunt. Qui sunt?

 MARCUS: Nonne heri in urbe vidisti multos cives post senatorem sequentes? Hic erat patronus, illi erant clientes. Pater meus est patronus multorum civium. Tu audivisti clientes domum intrantes.

 SEXTUS: Eheu! Eucleides quoque intravit!

 vinum, -I (n), wine sequentes, following

 Inspicio, Inspicere (3), Inspexi, Inspectum, to examine

 Patroni were wealthy men who gave food or money to their dependents (clientes). The clientes came to the patron’s home early in the morning to receive this dole and then escorted him to the Forum and performed other services for him. Here is Juvenal’s satirical comment:

 Now the meager dole sits on the outer edge of the threshold of the patron’s house to be snatched up by the clients in their togas. But first the patron inspects each face, fearing that someone might come and claim his due under a false name. Once he recognizes you, you’ll get your share.

 Juvenal, Satires 1.95-99

 5

 10

 15

 20

 Eucleides the Statistician

 Marcus had always visualized himself showing Sextus around the city of Rome, but he should have realized that Cornelius would never allow Sextus and himself to wander around Rome unsupervised. If neither Cornelius nor Titus was free to act as guide, Eucleides was bound to be their companion. He certainly knew a lot; the trouble was, there was no stopping him.

 “Rome,” Eucleides was now saying in that affected Greek voice of his, “is built on seven hills, the most famous being the Capitol and the Palatine. By now, of course, it has far outstripped these petty limits. Augustus divided it into fourteen regions, which are in turn subdivided into 265 vlcl or wards. At the last census the population numbered 1,284,602, living in 1,797 domus and 46,602 Insulae. ”

 “I can’t see any islands!” complained Sextus, in all seriousness.

 “Insulae,” explained Eucleides, “are those ramshackle tenements where all the riff-raff live.”

 “And Insula Feliculae is the biggest in the world,” said Marcus.

 “There are,” said Eucleides, “64 miles of streets, using your Roman measurements.”

 “Not very wide, are they?” commented Sextus.

 “Maximum width according to The Twelve Tables was only 17 feet.”

 “And some of them are not even paved!” cried Sextus, peering along the dark tunnel they were now traversing between the Insulae.

 “Watch out!” yelled Marcus, pulling Sextus and Eucleides close to the wall to dodge a deluge of slops from a third-floor window.

 “We’ll have the law on you for that!” shouted Marcus up at the unseen law-breaker. But Eucleides, not anxious to linger bandying threats, hustled the boys off through the labyrinth of shadowy alleys.

 Suddenly they emerged into the blinding sun of the open Forum.

 “This,” said Eucleides impressively, pointing to a massive column, “is the center of the universe, the Golden Milestone. Erected by Augustus, it bears upon it in letters of gilt bronze the distances to all the cities of the Empire.”

 But it was not the Golden Milestone the boys were looking at, nor was it the splendor of the Capitol behind them. They were gazing down at the Forum Romanum which glittered with marble and bronze and gold. Senators and businessmen with their slaves were hurrying in and out of the basilicae that flanked the Forum. The noise was deafening. Cries of sausage-sellers and pastry-vendors mingled with the uproar of every language under heaven. White toga and tunic jostled with all kinds of colors of outlandish garb.

 Eucleides, sensing their preoccupation, was just pursing his lips to launch out on a lecture on the Forum; but Marcus and Sextus were off, scampering along the Via Sacra.

 “Come and tell us what’s going on here!” they shouted, running to the far end of the Forum where their attention had been caught by the feverish activity of an army of masons engaged, amidst mountains of rubble and building stone, in some mammoth task of demolition or construction—it was hard to tell which.

 “The Emperor Nero—” began Eucleides breathlessly as he caught up with them.

 “I know,” said Marcus. “He’s the one that set Rome on fire for fun.”

 “The Emperor Nero,” Eucleides repeated, “on the space cleared of unsightly hovels by a quite accidental fire, built the wonderful Domus Aurea.”

 “And they’re still working at it by the look of it!” said Sextus, grinning.

 “No, you idiot!” said Marcus. “Vespasian and Titus pulled down parts of Nero’s folly and are putting up things for the citizens of Rome to enjoy, baths, for instance, and—”

 “And that terrific statue over there?” pointed Sextus.

 “That was a statue of Nero himself,” Marcus went on, “but Vespasian put rays around its head and made it into a statue of the sun-god.”

 “It is 118 feet high,” began Eucleides, but his hearers were gone again, towards an immense building under construction.

 “What’s this?” they asked, as an exhausted Eucleides caught up with them.

 “This is the Amphitheatrum Flavium,” he gasped. “The Emperor Titus is to dedicate it in June.”

 A Grim Lesson

 Eucleides et pueri iam domum redierant. Post cenam Cornelius et Marcus et Sextus in atrio sedebant.

 “Quid hodie vidistis, pueri?” inquit Cornelius.

 “Nihil nisi aedificia antiqua/’ respondit Marcus. “Nos in urbem exire volumus soli. Cur non licet?”

 Cui Cornelius, “Est periculosum sine custode exire in vias huius urbis. Sunt multi homines scelesti qui bona civium arripiunt. Nonnumquam hi homines cives ipsos necant. Vobis igitur non licet sine custode exire. Iam sero est. Nunc necesse est vobis cubitum Ire. Nolite cessare sed Ite statim!”

 Pueri, labore diei defessi, simulae cubitum Iverunt, obdormiverunt.

 Postridie mane Marcus in lecto suo iacebat et de Circo Maximo ita cogitabat: “Quando Circum Maximum visitabimus? Cur pater meus nos exire vetat? Heri nullos homines scelestos in urbe vidi. Interdiu certe praedones nobis non nocebunt. Meum patrem, quod est senator Romanus, praedones timent. Nihil periculi est.”

 Brevi tempore, ut Marco videbatur, pueri ad Circum ibant. Mox molem ingentem Circi Maximi Marcus conspexit.

 “Ecce!” clamavit Marcus. “Est Circus. Ubi intraverimus, tandem aurigas ipsos spectabimus.”

 Subito tamen in viam se praecipitaverunt tres homines.

 “Cave illos homines!” clamavit Sextus. “Illi certe nos in domus vicinas trahent et ibi nos necabunt.”

 Sed frustra, nam Marcus, metu commotus, postquam Sextum audivit clamantem, ad terram cecidit et iacebat in luto immobilis.

 “Eho!” clamavit unus e praedonibus. “Quo abis, parvule? Quid est nomen tuum? Nonne tu filius es senatoris? Nonne nomen tuum est Marcus Cornelius?”

 Cui Marcus, “Quid vultis, scelesti? Nihil pecuniae habeo. Nolite me verberare! Si mihi nocueritis, pater meus certe vos puniet.”

 Sed interpellavit praedo, “Tace, puer! Tu es captivus noster neque ad patrem redibis. Nemo nunc poterit te servare. Ipse enim te necabo.”

 Tum praedo gladium strinxit. Marcus stabat perterritus et, “Fer auxilium!” clamavit. “Fer auxilium!” Sed nemo clamorem audivit. Nemo auxilium tulit. Marcus oculos clausit et mortem exspectabat.

 Nihil accidit. Oculos aperuit. In lecto erat suo. Somnium modo fuerat. Hodie tamen domi manere constituit Marcus. Exire noluit.

 5

 10

 15

 20

 25

 30

 35

 80

 atrium, -I (n), atrium, central room

 metu commotus, moved by fear, in

 in a Roman house nisi, unless, except sine ( + abi), without custos, custodis (m), guard bona, bonorum (n pi), goods, pos-

 a panic

 terra, -ae ( f ), earth, ground lutum, -I (n), mud parvulus, -a, -um, little nocueritis, you will have harmed,

 sessions

 nonnumquam, sometimes postridie, on the following day iaceo (2), to lie, be lying down noceo (2) (+ dat.), to harm ut Marco videbatur, as it seemed to

 Marcus, as Marcus thought

 you harm

 neque, and . . . not servo (1), to save gladius, -I (m), sword oculus, -I (m), eye mors, mortis ( f), death doml, at home

 intraverimus, we will have entered, we enter

 arripio, arripere (3), arripui, arreptum, to snatch, seize

 veto, vetare (1), vetui, vetitum, to forbid

 stringo, stringere (3), strinxi, strictum, to draw

 claudo, claudere (3), clausi, clausum, to shut

 accidit, accidere (3), accidit, (it) happens

 aperio, aperire (4), aperui, apertum, to open

 nolo, nolle ( irreg .), nolui, to be unwilling, not to wish, refuse

 1. Quid pueri in urbe hodie viderunt?

 2. Cur non licet pueris exire in urbem solis?

 3. Quid faciunt homines scelesti in viis urbis?

 4. Quocum pueris licet exire in urbem?

 5. Quid Cornelius pueros statim facere iubet?

 6. Qua de re Marcus postridie in lecto cogitabat?

 7. Timetne Marcus interdiu in urbem exire?

 8. Praedonesne Marco et Sexto interdiu nocebunt?

 9. Quem praedones timebunt?

 10. Quo Ibant pueri?

 11. Quid Marcus conspexit?

 12. Qui se in viam praecipitaverunt?

 13. Quid fecit Marcus postquam Sextum clamantem audivit?

 14. Quid pater Marci faciet si praedones Marco nocuerint?

 15. Cur praedo gladium strinxit?

 16. Quis venit ubi Marcus clamavit?

 Exercise 25a

 Responde Latine:

 Quocum . . . ? With whom . . . ?

 DEMONSTRATIVE ADJECTIVES: Hic and Ille

 Look at the following sentences:

 Ille tabellarius equos vehementer incitavit.

 Quis in illo aedificio habitat?

 HI canes latrant modo.

 Est periculosum in vias huius urbis exire.

 Sextus, his clamoribus et hoc strepitu excitatus, dormire non poterat.

 That courier fiercely whipped the horses on.

 Who lives in that building over there?

 These dogs are only barking.

 It is dangerous to go out into the streets of this city.

 Roused by these shouts and this noise , Sextus could not sleep.

 You will see from the above examples that both hie and ille are used to point out someone or something. Hie points to someone or something near at hand or near in time, while ille points to someone or something further away or “over there” or distant in time.

 Here is a table showing all the cases of hie (“this,” “these”) and ille (“that,” “those”) in masculine, feminine, and neuter genders:

 Be sure you know all of the above forms.

 Exercise 25b

 Using story 25 as a guide , give the Latin for:

 1. It is dangerous to go out into the streets of this city.

 2. Why does my father forbid us to visit the Circus Maximus?

 3. Watch out for those men!

 4. You are our prisoner and no one will be able to save you.

 Exercise 25c

 Choose the proper form of hie or ille to fill each blank, and then read the sentence aloud and translate:

 Exercise 25d

 Read aloud and translate:

 1. Hic puer in hac via, ille puer in ilia via habitat.

 2. Illa puella in hac villa habitat; hi puer! in ilia villa habitant.

 3. Nonne illud aedificium mox ad terram cadet?

 4. Si in hac caupona pernoctabimus, hic caupo nobis certe nocebit.

 5. Illi praedones illos viatores sub his arboribus petunt.

 6. Quando illi servi haec onera in villam portabunt?

 7. Noli illud plaustrum in hanc urbem interdiu agere!

 8. Huic puero multa dabimus, illi nihil.

 9. His rusticis licebit agros huius villae colere.

 10. Huic senatori ad Curiam in lectica redire necesse erat.

 11. Illi aedificio appropinquare periculosum est, nam muri sunt Infirmi.

 12. Unus ex his praedonibus aliquid illi servo dicebat.

 VERBS: Future Perfect Tense

 Look at these sentences:

 Ubi intraverimus, tandem aurigas ipsos spectabimus.

 When we enter (will have entered, have entered), we will finally watch the charioteers themselves.

 Si mihi nocueritis, pater meus certe vos puniet.

 If you harm (will have harmed) me , my father will surely punish you.

 The verbs in boldface above are in the future perfect tense. The future perfect tense is used to express an action in the future which will be completed before another action will begin. Note that the Latin future perfect is often best translated by the present tense in English.

 The endings of the future perfect tense are the same for all Latin verbs:

 Note that, except for the third person plural, these endings are the same as the forms of the future tense of esse. These endings are added to the perfect stem, which is found by dropping the -I from the end of the third principal part of the verb, e.g., nocui, stem nocu-.

 Exercise 25e

 Read aloud and translate:

 1. Si illud baculum conieceris, hi canes ferociter latrabunt.

 2. Ubi ad Portam Capenam advenerimus, e raeda descendemus.

 3. Si equi raedam e fossa extraxerint, Cornelii ad urbem iter facere poterunt.

 4. Nisi caupo alium lectum in cubiculum moverit, Aurelia ibi dormire nolet.

 5. Cras pueri, ubi surrexerint, strepitum plaustrorum audient.

 moveo, movere (2), movi, motum, to move

 A Visit to the Races

 Chariot-racing (ludi circenses) was perhaps the most popular spectacle in ancient Rome. It was held in the Circus Maximus, a huge open-air stadium in the valley between the Palatine and the Aventine hills. It could hold about 200,000 spectators, seated in tiers around the long course (arena).

 It has been estimated that at one time some 90 holidays (feriae) were given over to games at public expense. On these days the citizens were “celebrating a holiday” (feriati).

 A barrier (spina) ran down the center of the course, and the chariots (quadrigae), each pulled by four horses, had to complete seven laps, about five miles or eight kilometers in all. Fouling was permitted, and collisions were frequent, especially at the turning posts (metae). A race began when the Emperor or presiding official gave the signal (signum) by dropping a white cloth (mappa).

 The charioteers, some of whom won great popularity and very high salaries, were employed by four companies (factiones), each with its own color—the “Reds” (russati), the “Whites” (albati), the “Greens” (prasini), and the “Blues” (veneti). Rival groups of spectators were accustomed to show their support (favere) for each color vociferously.

 One charioteer we hear about, Gaius Apuleius Diodes, drove chariots for the Red Stable for twenty-four years, ran 4,257 starts, and won 1,462 victories.

 No wonder Marcus, Cornelia, and Sextus are eager to go to the races! As we return to our story, three days after the Cornelii arrived in Rome, Sextus is sitting alone when suddenly Marcus rushes in.

 MARCUS:

 SEXTUS:

 MARCUS:

 SEXTUS:

 MARCUS:

 Sexte! Sexte! Hodie nobis licet ad ludos circenses Ire. Eu-cleides me et te et Corneliam ad Circum ducet.

 Ludos circenses amo. Sed nonne Circus clausus erit? Minime! Circus non erit clausus, nam hodie cives omnes feriati sunt. Viae erunt plenae hominum. Viri, mulieres, 5 liberi Circum celerrime petent.

 Sed cur non nunc discedimus? Ego sum iam paratus. Simulae Cornelia e somno surrexerit, statim ibimus.

 mulier, mulieris (/), woman

 (Much to the boys disgust, Cornelia was rather late in waking up from her siesta, but soon they were all ready to leave.)

 85

 EUCLEIDES:

 EUCLEIDES:

 CORNELIA:

 EUCLEIDES:

 MARCUS:

 Agite! Iam tandem ad Circum Ire tempus est. Estisne parati, pueri? Esne parata, Cornelia? . 10

 (Eucleides takes Cornelia and the boys quickly through the streets; they can now hear the noise of the Circus crowds.)

 Iam a Circo non procul absumus. Nonne strepitum auditis? Ecce! Omnes ad Circum festinant. Brevi tempore nos ipsi intrabimus.

 (They enter the Circus.)

 Quam ingens est turba hominum! Totus Circus est plenus spectatorum. 15

 Ita vero! Semper multi spectatores in Circo sunt. Hic considemus?

 Minime! Prope arenam sedere necesse est quod ibi omnia videre poterimus.

 totus, -a, -um, all, the whole

 faveo, favere (2), favi, fautum ( + dat.) y to favor, support

 r

 k

 J. Spectators’ SoatS

 2. Emperor's and distinguished guests* Seats

 3. Carceres (stalls)

 Spina, (low platform)

 S. Jdlstaa ( turning posts )

 MARCUS:

 CORNELIA:

 SEXTUS:

 CORNELIA:

 MARCUS:

 EUCLEIDES:

 O me miserum! Auriga meus equos devertit. Cave metam! Cave metam! Esne semisomnus, fatue? Cur metam non vitavisti? 35

 Eheu! Ille auriga cecidit. In arena iacet. Estne mortuus? Minime! Minime! Ecce! Animum recuperavit. Iam surgit. Audivistisne clamores horum spectatorum? Magna voce nomina aurigarum et equorum semper clamant! Undique ingens est strepitus! Tantum strepitum ego numquam au- 40 divi.

 Russati hanc victoriam habent, sed mox etiam albati habebunt victoriam. Gloria albatorum erit immortalis.

 Hoc fortasse accidet, sed Caligula ipse, ut dicunt, prasinos amabat.

 deverto, devertere (3), deverti, deversum, to turn aside

 (They watch a few more races, but it is not Marcus’ lucky day. Eucleides becomes a little anxious as it grows later. He had been caught once before in a crush at the gates.)

 EUCLEIDES: lam sero est. Nunc domum redibimus.

 SEXTUS: Nondum tempus est domum redire. Ecce! Aurigae habenas

 sumpserunt et signum exspectant.

 EUCLEIDES: Nisi mox discedemus, turbam ingentem vitare non poteri-

 mus. Agite! Domum!

 PREFIXES: Compound Verbs

 Compare the following sentences:

 1. Equi raedam trahunt.

 The horses pull the coach.

 2. Servi lectum ferebant.

 The slaves were carrying the bed.

 1 . Equi raedam extrahunt.

 The horses pull out the coach.

 2. Servi lectum referebant.

 The slaves were carrying back the bed.

 In the right-hand column a prefix has been added to the beginning of the verb to give it a more specific meaning. Verbs with prefixes attached to them are called compound verbs. Common prefixes are:

 ab-, abs-, a-, away, from ad-, towards, to circum-, around

 con-, along with, together (or simply to emphasize) de-, down, down from dis-, dl-, apart, in different directions ex-, e-, out, out of in-, into, in, on

 inter-, between

 per-, through (or simply to emphasize)

 prae-, in front, ahead

 praeter-, past, beyond

 pro-, prod-, forward

 re-, red-, back, again

 sub-, under, below

 trans-, tra- across

 Note that many of these are common prepositions. Be sure to learn these prefixes thoroughly.

 Exercise 26a

 Give the meaning of:

 1. abesse, adesse, inesse, praeesse, subesse, interesse.

 2. abire, adire, praeterire, transire, redire, exire, inire, praeire, subire, circumire.

 3. referre, transferre, conferre, Inferre, praeferre, deferre.

 4. discedere, excedere, incedere, recedere, procedere, intercedere, praecedere.

 cedo, cedere (3), cessi, cessum, to come, go

 Exercise 26b

 Read aloud and translate:

 1. Pater liberos e villa eduxit et trans viam traduxit.

 2. Cornelius Eucleidem iussit liberos abducere.

 3. Eucleides liberos ad hortum reduxit.

 4. Servi togas et tunicas in cistis reponunt.

 5. Ubi ad Portam Capenam veniunt, servi onera deponunt.

 7. Cornelii Romam heri advenerunt.

 8. Homo per viam it. Mox viam transibit et ad villam redibit.

 9. Ubi urbem intramus, necesse est Aquam Marciam subire.

 10. Pueri Circum reliquerunt et Palatinum circumierunt.

 11. Nihil clamoris, nihil strepitus ad Marcum pervenerat.

 12. Pueros, quod praecurrebant, identidem revocabat Cornelius.

 Honorary Inscription

 P. Aelius, Mari Rogati fll(ius), Gutta Calpumianus equis his vici in factione veneta: Germinatore n(igro) A(fro) LXXXXII, Silvano r(ufo) Af(ro) CV, Nitid(o) gil(vo) Af(ro) LH, Saxone n(igro) Af(ro) LX, et vici praemia m(aiora) L I, XL IX, XXX XVII.

 I, Publius Aelius Gutta Calpumianus, son of Marius Rogatus, won for the Blue stable with the following horses: Germinator, African black, 92 (times); Silvanus, African chestnut, 105 (times); Glossy, African sorrel, 52 (times); Saxon, African black, 60 (times); and I won major purses of 50,000 sesterces (1), of 40,000 sesterces (9), and of 30,000 sesterces (17).

 Sepulchral Inscription

 D. M. Epaphroditus agitator f(actionis) r(ussatae), vlc(it) CLXXVIII, et ad purpureum llber(atus) vlc(it) VIII. Beia Felicula f(ecit) coniugl suo b(ene) merenti.

 To the deified spirits (of) Epaphroditus, driver for the Red stable; he won 178 (times), and after being manumitted to the Purples he won 8 (times). Beia Felicula made (this monument) for her deserving husband.

 Curses against Charioteers and Their Horses

 Adiuro te daemon quicumque es et demando tibi ex hac hora ex hac die ex hoc momento, ut equos Prasini et Albi crucies occidas, et agitatores Clarum et Felicem et Primulum et Romanum occidas collidas, neque spiritum illis relinquas.

 I adjure you, demon, whoever you are, and 1 ask of you from this hour, from this day, from this moment, that you torture and kill the horses of the Green and the White, and that you kill and smash their drivers Clams and Felix and Primulus and Romanus, and leave no breath in them.

 Versiculi: "Medea," pages 103-105.

 91

 Word Study VII

 Prefixes

 Knowledge of Latin prefixes will help not only with the meanings of Latin compound verbs but also with the meanings of many English words derived from them. For example, when the Latin simple verb portare is combined with various prefixes, the resulting compound verbs provide English with several words, e.g.:

 deport (from deportare) report (from reportare)

 export (from exportare) transport (from transportare)

 Relying on your knowledge of prefixes, can you tell the meaning of each of the English words above?

 Some English words are derived from the infinitive stem of the Latin compound verb, e.g., transport (from transportare). Others are derived from the supine stem, e.g., transportation (from transportatum). (For the suffix -tion see Word Study VI.)

 Exercise 1

 After each Latin simple verb below is a group of English verbs which are derived from Latin compounds of that simple verb. (The Latin compound verbs are in parentheses.) Give the meaning of each English verb:

 duco, ducere (3), duxi, ductum

 1. to conduct (conducere) 4. to reduce (reducere)

 2. to induct (inducere) 5. to produce (producere)

 3. to deduct (deducere) 6. to adduce (adducere)

 pono, ponere (3), posui positum

 1. to propose (proponere) 4. to depose (deponere)

 2. to dispose (disponere) 5. to transpose (transponere)

 3. to expose (exponere) 6. to deposit (deponere)

 cedo, cedere (3), cessi, cessum

 1. to precede (praecedere) variant spelling :

 2. to recede (recedere) 4. to proceed (procedere)

 3. to intercede (intercedere) 5. to exceed (excedere)

 Note that cedere can also mean to yield. From this meaning come the following English derivatives:

 6. to cede (cedere) 7. to concede (concedere)

 1. to refer (referre) 4. to transfer (transferre)

 2. to infer (Inferre) 5. to confer (conferre)

 3. to defer (deferre) 6. to relate (referre)

 Exercise 2

 Give the infinitive of the Latin compound verb from which each of the following English nouns is derived. Use each English noun in a sentence which illustrates its meaning:

 Exercise 3

 Each adjective in the pool below is derived from a Latin compound verb. Choose an adjective to fill each blank and give the Latin compound verb from which it is derived:

 1. Eucleides provided an atmosphere for the boys that would lead them to

 learn. The atmosphere was to learning.

 2. The slave-woman, Syra, was shy and preferred not to socialize with the

 other slaves. Syra had a personality.

 3. Although the horses tried to pull the carriage out, their efforts brought

 forth no results. Their efforts were not 

 4. Some masters treat their slaves with violence which goes beyond reasonable

 limits. Their use of violence is 

 5. Davus was not unhappy, but he was not as happy as he might have been

 if he were not a slave. Davus enjoyed happiness.

 6. When Cornelius entered a shop, the merchant left the other customers

 and helped him immediately. Cornelius received treatment.

 7. After he considered all of the evidence, the overseer was certain which

 slave stole the money. The overseer used reasoning to come

 to his conclusion.

 8. When the emperor went by, all the citizens bowed respectfully. The

 emperor was greeted in a manner.

 93

 Latin Abbreviations in English

 Many abbreviations used in English are actually abbreviations of Latin words. For example, the common abbreviations for morning and afternoon, A.M. and P.M., stand for the Latin phrases ante meridiem (before noon) and post meridiem (after noon).

 Exercise 4

 With the aid of an English dictionary, give the full Latin words for the following abbreviations and explain how each is used in English:

 Exercise 5

 Replace the words in italics with abbreviations chosen from the list in Exercise 4 above:

 1. The senators discussed the most critical problems first, for example, the revolt in Judea.

 2. Titus was known for his ability to speak at will on almost any subject.

 3. The eruption of Vesuvius occurred in the year of our Lord 79.

 4. Titus pointed out the Curia, the Arch of Tiberius, and the rest, as they passed them.

 5. The announcement of the chariot race read, “Reds against Blues.”

 6. Eucleides said that they would return early, that is, before the eleventh hour.

 7. At the bottom of the letter Cornelius added an afterthought.

 8. Cornelius had invited Titus, Messala, and others, to a dinner-party.

 9. The abbreviation “B.C.” is used to give dates before the birth of Christ. (Compare the abbreviation “A.D.”)

 10. A sign near the Porta Capena read, “Note well: It is forbidden to drive wagons or carriages within the city during the day.”

 11. “Take this” was written at the bottom of the doctor’s prescription.

 12. “Which see” is written after a word or topic which needs further explanation, and it directs the reader to find such explanation elsewhere in the book.

 Find examples of Latin abbreviations in textbooks, newspapers, or

 magazines and bring them to class.

 Review VI

 Exercise Via

 From the list at the right select appropriate words to go with each of the following nouns. Give alternatives where requested.

 23.

 24.

 or

 dies

 manus

 tabernae

 praedones

 parentum

 hos

 his

 hoc

 huic

 hunc

 hoc

 has

 huius

 harum

 hac

 hic

 hi

 hanc

 hae

 haec

 horum

 Exercise VIb

 From the pool of words below, choose an adjective to go with each noun in Exercise Via above. Give the noun with the adjective in its proper form to modify the noun.

 Exercise Vic

 Choose the correct form of the two choices in parentheses , read the sentence aloud , and translate it:

 1. Sextus (illi, illo) arcu! appropinquavit.

 2. Miles (illum, illud) gladium strinxit.

 3. Hercules (illa, illo) manu Cerberum ex Inferis extraxit.

 4. Latratus (illum, illorum) canum pueros dormientes excitavit.

 5. Cornelii (illi, illo) die Romam advenerunt.

 Exercise VId

 Read the passage below and answer , in English , the questions that follow:

 Porsinna, rex Clusinorum, urbem Romam iam diu obsidebat. Romani igitur, quod cibum in urbem afferre non poterant, fame peribant. Tum adulescens quidam Romanus, Gaius Mucius nomine, qui cives suos servare volebat, Porsinnam necare constituit.

 Itaque Mucius, ubi Curiam intravit, senatoribus, “Tiberim transire,” inquit, “et castra hostium intrare volo. Ibi Porsinnam petam et, si di adiuvabunt, eum necabo.”

 Cui senatores, “Si hoc facere vis, nos te non vetamus.” Laetus domum rediit Mucius. Gladium sumpsit et intra vestes celavit. Trans Tiberim festinavit et in castra hostium clam intravit. Ibi magnam multitudinem militum vidit. Ad mensam sedebant duo homines. Alter pecuniam militibus dabat, alter spectabat. Secum cogitabat Mucius, “Uter est rex? Nonne is est qui omnia facit? Illum necabo.” Gladium strinxit. Hominem necavit. Stupuit turba adstantium. Ex castris paene effugerat Mucius cum custodes regis eum comprehenderunt. “O sceleste!” inquiunt. “Cur scribam regis necavisti?”

 “At regem,” inquit Mucius, “necare volui.”

 Rex, ubi hoc audivit, clamavit, “Ego te gravissime puniam.”

 Superbe respondit Mucius, “Civis sum Romanus. Me Gaium Mucium vocant. Cives Romani, qui magnam gloriam petunt, poenas non timent.” Forte Mucius tum stabat prope ignem qui in altaribus erat. Subito dextram manum in ignem iniecit. Statim rex surrexit et iussit custodes virum ab igne trahere. “Quamquam,” inquit, “hostis es, tamen, quod vir fortissimus es, te ad cives tuos iam remitto.”

 Postquam Mucius Romam rediit, rem totam civibus narravit. Illi non modo Mucium laudabant sed, quod iam sinistram modo manum habebat, cognomen ei dederunt Scaevolam.

 5

 10

 15

 20

 25

 rex, regis (m), king

 fame perire, to die of hunger

 adulescens, adulescentis (m), young

 man

 castra, -orum (n pi), camp hostis, hostis (m), enemy di, deorum (m pi), the gods vestis, vestis ( f ), garment clam, secretly mensa, -ae (/), table Uter . . . ? Utra . . . ?

 Utrum . . . ? Which . . . ? (of two)

 paene, almost scriba, -ae (m), clerk gravissime, very seriously superbe, proudly poena, -ae (/), punishment forte, by chance ignis, ignis (m), fire altaria, altarium (n pi), altar dexter, dextra, dextrum, right fortissimus, -a, -um, very brave sinister, sinistra, sinistrum, left cognomen, cognominis (n), nick-

 name, surname

 obsideo, obsidere (2), obsedi, obsessum, to besiege affero, afferre ( irreg .), attuli, allatum, to carry towards, bring comprehendo, comprehendere (3), comprehendi, comprehensum, to seize, arrest

 stupeo, stupere (2), stupui, to be astonished

 1. What was the effect of King Porsinna’s siege of Rome?

 2. Who decided to kill Porsinna? Why?

 3. What four things did he propose to do?

 4. Did the senators grant permission? Quote the Latin words which support your answer.

 5. Quote two words that show that Mucius was disguising his intentions as he went about his mission.

 6. What was each of the two men at the table doing?

 7. What made Mucius decide which of the two was the king?

 8. Whom did the guards tell him he had killed?

 9. Quote and translate the words which express the king’s first reaction.

 10. What boast did Mucius make about himself?

 11. What boast did Mucius make about his fellow citizens?

 12. What did he do to show he was not afraid?

 13. What order did the king give the guards?

 14. What reason did the king give for sending Mucius home?

 15. Translate the clause quod iam sinistram modo manum habebat.

 16. What do you think is the meaning of the nickname “Scaevola”?

 Exercise Vie

 Give the appropriate future perfect form of each verb in parentheses , read the sentence aloud, and translate:

 1. “Si ego ad Curiam sero (advenire), senatores Irati erunt,” cogitabat Cornelius.

 2. Ubi pater manus (lavare) et togam puram (induere), ad Curiam statim ibit.

 3. “Nisi tu pecuniam nobis (dare), te certe necabo,” clamavit praedo.

 4. Illos praedones, si Marco (nocere), Cornelius certe puniet.

 5. “Ubi fabulam militis (audire), pater, statim cubitum ibimus,” inquit Marcus.

 Exercise Vlf

 Give the requested forms of the following verbs in the present, imperfect, future, perfect, pluperfect, and future perfect tenses:

 Future

 Present Imperfect Future Perfect Pluperfect Perfect

 1. vetare (1st pi) 

 2. aperire (3rd pi) 

 3. stertere (2nd pi) 

 4. esse (3rd sing.) : 

 5. emo (3rd sing.) 

 6. ferre (2nd sing.) 

 7. arripere (1 st sing.) 

 8. docere (1st sing.) 

 9. posse (2nd sing.) 

 10. velle (1st pi.) 1 

 VERSICULI

 10 Arrival at the Inn

 (after Chapter 17)

 Cauponam petimus caupoque recepit obesus.

 “Hic bene dormitur,” dicit, inire iubens.

 recepit, (he) welcomed (us) bene dormitur, you’ll sleep well dico, dicere (3), to say ineo, inire ( irreg .), to come in iubens, bidding (us)

 11 Murder

 (after Chapter 20)

 (0

 Septimus in Somno te conspicit, Aule, necatum.

 Cras (eheu!) in plaustro triste cadaver erit.

 (n)

 “Fer, comes, auxilium!” clamavi, “Septime.” Sed tu, “Somnia,” dixisti, “maesta fuere modo.”

 Nunc, quod non illis potuisti credere verbis,

 nunc quaere in faeno corpus, amice, meum!

 (Hi)

 Cur Marcus cubitum Ire timet vigilatque etiam nunc? Quod puerum timidum fabula mira movet.

 erit, (it) will be

 triste cadaver, a wretched corpse

 comes, comitis ( m/f ), companion

 maestus, -a, -um, sad

 fiiere = fuerunt

 potuisti, you were able

 illis credere verbis, to believe those words

 quaero, quaerere (3), quaesivi, quaesitum, to look for

 faenum, -I (n), hay

 mirus, -a, -um, wonderful, strange

 (after Chapter 23)

 The young hero Theseus is making his way to Athens. During his journey, he has met and overcome many giants, paying them in kind for their evil ways. He is almost to the city when he encounters the last of the giants, Procrustes. The name means “Stretcher.” Why “Stretcher”? This the story reveals.

 Longum iter est calidusque dies. Stetit ille. Sinistra parte videt magnam non procul inde domum.

 “Rex latronum habitat caupo-ne benignus in illa?” se rogat. It propius. Ianua aperta manet.

 In qua verba legit. “Salve,”—sic scribitur—“hospes. 5

 Hic bene dormitur. Huc et adire tibi— solus si venies—licet, hic carnemque paratam sumere et in lecto ponere membra meo.”

 Intravit Theseus. Carnem consumere multam

 audet et in lecto ponere membra sua. 10

 Mox obdormivit. Parva est mora. Somnia vidit: audent magna ambos monstra tenere pedes!

 Sollicitus somnis sese excitat. Ecce, super se conspexit hostem stare minante manu.

 Talia qui magna reprehendit voce, “Viator, 15

 sat iam audes lecti, iam sat habere cibi.

 Quod debetur adest nobis iam solvere tempus!”

 Cui Theseus, “Quid me solvere, amice, iubes?”

 “Talia praebebis,” dixit, “ludibria nobis

 qualia iam hic omnes qui iacuere prius. 20

 Nam quos invenio pro lectis esse minores

 illorum extendet machina membra potens.

 Sed qui longa nimis praebebit membra, necesse est aut illi caput aut ense secare pedes.

 Haec in te faciam!” dixit gladiumque levabat. 25

 Quem Theseus petiit corripuitque manu.

 Nec longum sequitur certamen membraque fiunt cauponis lectis ocius apta suis.

 100

 sto, stare (1), steti statum, to stand sinister, sinistra, sinistrum, left (as opposed to right) inde, from there rex, regis (m), king latro, latronis (m), thief -ne, or

 propius, nearer, closer apertus, -a, -um, open 5 verbum, -I (n), word

 sic scribitur, thus it is written bene dormitur, you’ll sleep well adeo, adire ( irreg .), adii, aditum, to approach caro, camis (/), meat membrum, -i (n), limb 10 audeo, audere (2), ausus sum, to dare

 parvus, -a, -um, small, short mora, -ae (/"), delay, passage of time

 ambo, -ae, 6 , both monstrum, -i (n), monster pes, pedis (m), foot super (+ acc .), above 14 hostis, -is (m), enemy

 minante manu, with threatening hand

 quod debetur, what you owe solvo, solvere (3), solvi, solutum, to pay

 talia . . . qualia, such ... as praebeo (2), to offer, provide ludibrium, -i (n), amusement, fun 20 iaceo (2), to lie, recline (iacuere = iacuerunt) prius, before

 pro ( + abi), in relation to minores, smaller, shorter machina, -ae (/"), machine potens, potentis, powerful nimis, too

 illi {dat.) y for, of that (person) caput, capitis (n), head ensis, ensis (m), sword seco, secare (1), secui, sectum, to cut

 25 haec, these things gladius, -i (m), sword levo (1), to raise

 petiit = petivit

 corripio, corripere (3), corripui, correptum, to grab hold of, seize sequitur, (it) follows certamen, certaminis (n), struggle, contest

 fiunt, (they) become, are made 6cius, quickly

 aptus, -a, -um, fitted to, of a suitable length for (4- dat.)

 Answer in Latin or English the following questions on Versiculi 12 (Procrustes):

 1. Why do you think Theseus stopped (line 1)?

 2. Where did he see a house?

 3. What two questions does he ask himself (line 3)?

 4. Is the house inviting (line 4)? How so?

 5. What does the house promise (line 6)?

 6. What restriction does the house place on its hospitality (line 7)?

 7. What two things can a guest do in the house (lines 7-8)?

 8. What four things does Theseus proceed to do (lines 9-11)?

 9. What does he see in his dream (line 12)?

 10. What does he see when he wakes up?

 11. According to the speaker in line 16, of what two things has Theseus had enough?

 12. What does Procrustes say it is time to do now (line 17)?

 13. What must Theseus offer in payment for his food and rest (lines 19-

 20 )?

 14. What does Procrustes do with short people (lines 21-22)?

 15. What does he do with people who are too tall (lines 23-24)?

 16. Judging from line 25, were Theseus’ limbs too short or too long?

 17. What does Theseus do when Procrustes attacks him (line 26)?

 18. What does Theseus do to Procrustes (lines 27-28)?

 BONUS QUESTION: What clause early in the poem foreshadows trou-

 ble?

 (after Chapter 26)

 In order to win back the kingdom which was his by right, Jason was told to sail to the far land of Colchis and bring back the Golden Fleece which was guarded by a great and ever-watchful serpent. There the king, Aeetes by name, was very unwilling to part with his priceless treasure and laid upon Jason a seemingly impossible task. He was to take two fire-breathing bulls, plough a field with them, and sow there a dragon’s teeth, from which would immediately spring a nation of warriors bent on murdering him. King Aeetes thought he had baffled Jason’s attempt. Surely he would never face such a trial, or if he did there could be no doubt how things would turn out. But Aeetes reckoned without the goddess of love, who put into his daughter’s heart a fierce passion for the brave stranger. This daughter, Medea, was a sorceress and knew the secret powers of many herbs and spells. She smeared Jason with a magic ointment which provided an effective antidote to the bulls’ fiery breath and told him, when the warriors sprang up to kill him, to throw a stone into their midst. They would be sure to blame one another and begin a fight which would end in their deaths at each other’s hands. She used her magic also to charm the serpent and get away safely with Jason and the fleece in the good ship Argo. .

 103

 Aeetae postquam audivit crudelia verba heros, (heu!) stupuit conticuitque diu.

 Verba patris nec non audivit filia; nocte quae venit media, fldaque verba dedit:

 “Quod iubeo si cras facies, et vivus abire 5

 aurea et incolumis vellera habere potes.

 Sed quamquam securus eris, simulare timorem debebis multum fataque flere tua, si tu me, hospes, amas.” Miro medicamine corpus

 unxit amatori, miraque multa docet. 10

 Non magnus labor inde boves adiungere magnos;

 illi flamma boum nulla molesta fuit.

 Parturiunt sulci. Iam nascitur inde virorum turba armatorum magna. Nec ille fugit.

 Saxa iacit. Socium culpabat quisque, sed ensem 15

 strinxit. Mox miles mortuus omnis erat.

 Sed malus ingenti custodit corpore serpens, aurea nec quemquam vellera adire sinit; nam non clausa simul sunt omnia lumina somno:

 quot dormire oculi, tot vigilare solent. 20

 At quid non, Medea, potes medicamine? Moles serpentis somno mox superata iacet.

 Aeetes, -ae (m). King Aeetes crudelis, -is, -e, cruel verbum, -I (n), word heros (the hero is Jason) heu = eheu conticuit, (he) was silent nec, and not

 nec non, also quae, and she

 fidus, -a, -um, faithful, trustworthy 5 quod iubeo, what I tell you vivus, -a, -um, alive vellera (n pi), fleece securus, -a, -um, without fear debebis, you will have to multus, -a, -um, much fleo, flere (3), flevi, fletum, to lament over

 miro medicamine, with a strange ointment

 corpus . . . amatori, her lover’s body

 10 unguo, unguere (3), unxi, unctum, to smear

 inde, affer that, from there adiungo, adiungere (3), adiunxl, adiunctum, to yoke bourn, of the bulls parturiunt sulci, the furrows strain to give birth nascitur, is born armatus, -a, -um, armed 1 5 saxum, -I (n), a boulder

 socium culpabat quisque, each (of the armed men) began to blame his neighbor ensis, ensis (m), sword malus, -a, -um, evil nec quemquam sinit, and does not allow anyone lumina, eyes

 20 quot . . . tot, as many ... so many superatus, -a, -um, overcome

 Answer in Latin or English the following questions on Versiculi 13 (Medea):

 1. What was Jason’s reaction to Aeetes’ words (line 2)?

 2. What word reveals the reason for this reaction?

 3. What was the substance of these crudelia verba (see introductory paragraph)?

 4. Why should Jason trust the words of Aeetes’ daughter (see line 4 and introductory paragraph)?

 5. Rewrite the Latin of lines 5-6 in English word order.

 6. What does Medea ask Jason to do to prove his love for her (lines 7-9)?

 7. In what ways did Medea help Jason (lines 9-10)?

 8. What was the subsequent effect of this medicamen (lines 11-12)?

 9. What is the effect of the redundancy (anaphora) of mlrus in lines 9 and 10?

 10. To whom or what does ill! (line 12) refer?

 11. What is the “crop” that the furrows strain to bear in line 13?

 12. How does Jason react to this threat (lines 14-15)?

 13. How does the situation resolve itself (lines 15-16)?

 14. Of what poetic technique or device is mox miles mortuus (line 16) an example? Find another example in this poem.

 15. What is the effect of the placement of the words in line 17?

 16. What do we learn about the dragon in lines 17-20?

 17. Does lumina (line 19) really mean “eyes”? Find its basic meaning in a Latin dictionary.

 18. “Apostrophe” is a sudden break from the previous method of discourse and an address, in the second person, of some person or object, absent or present. Explain why line 21 is an apostrophe.

 19. What do we learn about Medea from this apostrophe?

 20. “Periphrasis” is a roundabout way of saying something. How else could you express the idea conveyed by moles serpentis (lines 21-22)?

 21. A particular sound can be used in poetry to create the effect of sleep. What is that sound and how is it effective in the last line of the poem?

 FORMS

 I. Nouns

 II. Adjectives
part0002 

 111. Numerical Adjectives or Numbers

 V. Pronouns

 VI. Regular Verbs

 VI. Regular Verbs (continued)

 VI. Regular Verbs (continued)

 VII. Irregular Verbs

 114

 Note: perfect, pluperfect, and future perfect tenses are formed regularly from the perfect stem plus the regular endings.

 Vocabulary

 19

 19

 20

 17

 18

 21

 26

 25

 19

 22

 17

 23

 23

 21

 25

 20

 26

 22

 22

 21

 19

 19

 19

 25

 24

 mater, matris (/) maximus, -a, -um me

 medius, -a, -um media nox Megara, -ae ( f)

 Mehercule!

 melior, melioris

 mercator, mercatoris (m)

 meta, -ae (f)

 metus, -us (m)

 meus, -a, -um

 mihi

 miles, militis (m)

 Minime (vero)!

 mirus, -a, -um

 miser, misera, miserum

 mitto, mittere (3), misi, missum

 modo

 moles, molis (f)

 molestus, -a, -um

 mons, montis (m)

 monstro (1)

 mors, mortis, (/)

 mortuus, -a, -um

 moveo, movere (2), movi, motum

 mox

 mulier, mulieris (f) multi, -ae, -a

 multitudo, multitOdinis (/) murus, -I (m) mus, muris (m) musso (1)

 nam

 narratus, -a, -um narro (1)

 -ne

 necesse neco (1) nemo, neminis neque

 neque . . . neque neque tamen

 mother

 very great, greatest, very large me

 mid-, middle of midnight

 Megara (a city in Greece)

 By Hercules! Goodness me!

 better

 merchant

 mark, goal, turning-post fear

 my, mine for me, to me soldier

 Not at all! Not in the least! No! wonderful, marvelous, strange unhappy, miserable, wretched to send only

 mass, huge bulk

 troublesome, annoying

 mountain, hill

 to show

 death

 dead

 to move

 soon, presently

 woman

 many

 crowd

 wall

 mouse

 to murmur, mutter

 for

 told

 to tell (a story)

 (indicates a question)

 necessary

 to kill

 no one

 and . . . not

 neither . . . nor

 but . . . not

 122

 17

 25

 21

 18

 25

 24

 24

 19

 20

 17

 23

 25

 17

 24

 19

 19

 21

 17

 23

 25

 nescio (4)

 nihil

 Nihil mali, nisi nobis

 noceo (2) (+ dat.)

 nocte

 nocturnus, -a, -um nolo, nolle ( irreg .), nolui nomen, nominis (n) non

 nondum Nonne. . . ?

 nonnumquam

 nos

 noster, nostra, nostrum novus, -a, -um nox, noctis ( f) nullus, -a, -um numerus, -I (m) numquam nunc

 nuntius, -I (m)

 obdormio (4) obesus, -a, -um

 occurro, occurrere (3), occurri, occursum ( + dat.) oculus, -I (m) olim

 omnis, -is, -e onus, oneris (n) oppressus, -a, -um optimus, -a, -um Vir optime! orator, oratoris (m) os, ossis (n)

 Palatinus, -a, -um paratus, -a, -um parens, parentis ( m/f) piro (1)

 parvulus, -a, -um

 to be ignorant, not know nothing

 There is nothing wrong, unless, if. . . not, except for us, to us to harm at night

 happening during the night to be unwilling, not to wish name not

 not yet

 (introduces a question that expects the answer “yes”) sometimes we, us our new night no, none number never now

 messenger

 to go to sleep fat

 to meet eye

 once (upon a time)

 all, the whole, every, each

 load, burden

 crushed

 best, very good

 Sir!

 orator, speaker bone

 belonging to the Palatine Hill

 ready, prepared

 parent

 to prepare

 small, little

 123